THE MANOEUVRES OF INVERTED FLIGHT
THE JOURNAL OF THE ROYAL AERONAUTICAL SOCIETY 

PROCEEDINGS 
SECOND MEETING, 59TH SESSION 

The more stable an aeroplane is in normal flight, the more difficult is the 
pilot's task of maintaining the inverted position, and vice versa. It is 
therefore relatively easier to fly unstable aeroplanes like the Sopwith 
"Camel" and "Snipe" inverted than stable aeroplanes like the S.E.5A. The "Bat 
Bantam," which is about neutral in stability at normal flying speeds, falls 
between the two extremes.

While the stability characteristics discussed above are the chief determinant 
of an aeroplane's behaviour, its balance has a most important effect on the 
case of inverted flying, or alternatively the ease of recovery. The 
disposition of the Sopwith "Camel" to remain inverted is weakened by the 
standard practice of rigging it tail heavy in normal flight, whereby a 
tendency towards self-righting is introduced. When the "Camel" was rigged so 
as to balance correctly in normal flight, accidents occurred; for its 
inclination to follow its natural stability characteristics and remain 
inverted was thus allowed greater freedom.

Before the behaviour of individual aeroplanes is dealt with, a note on the 
management of the engine is necessary. The petrol systems of aeroplanes do not 
make special provision for petrol supply to the engine when inverted. It is 
only by chance that in one or two aeroplanes petrol continues to be supplied 
to the engine; and independently of the petrol system a stationary engine with 
a float carburettor will cease firing almost immediately on inversion. 
Although the method of attaining the inverted position by means of a half loop 
is suited to stationary-engined aeroplanes on account of the absence of 
gyroscopic effect, the wisdom of turning the aeroplane upside down with the 
stationary engine running and allowing it to cut out, is questionable. A 
certain amount of petrol is bound to be spilt out, the presence of which is 
undesirable inside the cowling. Unfortunately an aeroplane cannot be half 
looped on to its back without the engine running, and Bulman, has frequently 
done this on the "Bat Bantam" and the S.E.5A for experimental purposes, If 
petrol can be supplied to it, a rotary engine with a block tube carburettor 
will continue to fire. The Clerget engine of a Sopwith “Camel” will continue 
to run for half a minute on petrol contained in the pipes between the tank and 
the engine. Oil is nearly always spilt into the cowling, and on the Sopwith 
“Camel” I have had trays fitted to collect it.

(b) Application to Particular Aeroplanes

Standard Sopwith “Camel” The standard Sopwith "Camel" may be inverted by any 
of the methods referred to above. Inversion by the half loop is attended by 
the difficulties arising from the gyroscopic effect of the engine, accentuated 
by the very small rudder. In the second quadrant of an ordinary loop, full 
left rudder is needed to keep this aeroplane from yawing to the right. The 
rudder moment, which is then just sufficient to hold the yaw in check, induces 
a skid to the right. If a loop on a “Camel” is observed by another aeroplane 
from behind, the "Camel," when held straight by its pilot, is seen to skid 
bodily sideways. The skid is not, however, appreciated by the pilot in the 
"Camel." On a stationary-engined aeroplane where there is practically no 
gyroscopic effect, the pilot knows he has looped straight if he re-enters his 
own backwash; if on a rotary-engined aeroplane he has held the nose straight 
he will be displaced laterally and pass it by. Apart from the gyroscopic 
effect just referred to the "Camel," being rigged tail heavy, behaves sweetly 
in the first half of a loop. The pilot is merely concerned in releasing his 
pressure on the control stick and allowing the nose to rise up. By the time he 
is inverted the control stick is fully back and the rudder is full across to 
the left. To commence inverted flight, it is sufficient to exert a gentle 
forward pressure on the control stick. At this moment the gyroscopic effect 
disappears suddenly, and, if the rudder is not centralised at once, the 
aeroplane will slew rapidly to the left. To perform this manoeuvre correctly 
the pilot has to ensure that he has enough speed on top of the loop to prevent 
an immediate stall, and to co-ordinate his elevator and rudder movements 
sensitively. A misjudgement either of speed or of control movement is enough 
to spoil the manoeuvre (see Fig. III).

The above difficulties are reduced if inversion is attained by a half roll. 
The slow half roll seems most adapted to the flying qualities of the "Camel." 
In this manoeuvre the pilot cannot, unless he sideslips severely, avoid yawing 
off his course; as however he yaws the other way in the half roll for recovery,
 he regains his initial direction of flight. The gyroscopic effect of the 
engine asserts itself, but is not so difficult to deal with. If the pilot 
rolls to the right, the nose is forced down and if to the left, it is forced 
up. As the rudder is so small, a right*-hand roll is easier; for it is better 
that the nose should drop rather than rise if the limit of rudder control is 
exceeded. Again, the pilot has greater control over the speed than at the top 
of the half loop. A convenient speed at which to commence the half roll is 
between 70 and 90 m.p.h. at half throttle. In half rolling to the right the 
pilot gently but firmly applies right rudder and right aileron. The “Camel” 
begins to roll over and to turn to the right. In anticipation of the 
gyroscopic effect the pilot has previously lifted the nose slightly; as soon, 
however, as the rudder and elevator interchange functions, he commences to 
push the control stick forward and turning ceases. As the wings pass the 
vertical he maintains right aileron, gradually takes off right rudder, and 
pushes the control stick more forward -until as he approaches the inverted 
position he takes off right aileron completely and finishes with the control 
stick slightly forward of the central position. The movement of the control 
stick amounts to an anti-clockwise circular sweep in the right-hand side of 
the cockpit. Bulman found that he was able in half rolling to push the control 
stick forward at an earlier stage, and thus to keep on his course better. When 
I tried this I induced a. severe side-slip. As however Bulman usually rolls to 
the left and I to the right it is conceivable that the pilot's instinctive 
allowance for the gyroscopic effect forms a habit which tends to persist even 
when the roll is made in the reverse sense to that which is customary. In this 
connection, it is interesting to note that nearly all pilots are right or 
left-handed, and that few experience the same ease in performing a complicated 
manoeuvre to the left and right.

Modified Sopwith "Camel"-The modified "Camel" cou1d be inverted either by half 
looping or half rolling. In an ordinary loop Its longitudinal stability caused 
it to behave differently to a standard "Camel." Whereas during the second 
quadrant the latter came over almost too quickly the modified "Camel" had to 
be pulled over like the S.E.5A. Again, during the third quadrant, the modified 
"Camel” dropped its nose more quickly than the standard ,"Camel"; and 
therefore, in the half looping method of attaining the inverted position, the 
control stick had to be pushed forward more vigorously to keep the nose from 
failing. As In the standard "Camel," it was necessary to manipulate the rudder 
to counteract gyroscopic effect, but the likelihood of spoiling the manoeuvre 
by a failure to centralise it as inverted flight commenced and the aeroplane 
became nearly stalled, was less.

I did not try the quick half roll for attaining inverted flight, though it 
would probably have been attended by no difficulty. In the slow half roll the 
controls had to be used, as a whole, more vigorously than in the standard 
"Camel." The movements were similar, with the exception that the control stick 
had to be pushed forward more definitely to keep the nose up as the aeroplane 
became inverted. In other words, the modified “Camel” showed characteristics 
similar to stable aeroplanes like the S. E.5A.

The half looping method is used as described for the "Camel" the commencing 
speed being 120 to 125 m.p.h., 10 to 15 m.p.h. in excess of that for an 
ordinary loop. At a point when the centre section spar appears to subtend 
about 10° to the horizon, the control stick is gently but deliberately pushed 
forward until the nose is steadied in the inverted. position and held there. 
Gerrard says that he could keep his engine full on in Inverted flight for a 
considerable period, and as a result was actually able to climb. If the engine 
were throttled back the nose fell somewhat and an inverted glide resulted. In 
this method the pilot is faced with a gyroscopic effect Similar to that 
noticed in the “Camel” and has to use the same judgment in centralising the 
rudder at the commencement of Inverted flight. Although the "Snipe" is fitted 
with a large rotary engine (the B. R.2), It has, relatively to the "Camel," a 
large rudder which is better suited to counteract the violent gyroscopic 
effect. The centralisation of the rudder must be a direct consequence of the 
new conditions set up by the pushing forward of the control stick; and if, 
after pushing forward the control stick, the pilot is late in centralising the 
rudder, he stalls on his back with rudder on and introduces the set of 
conditions favourable to the inverted spin. (See Part III. (l).) Again, If the 
pilot pushes forward the control stick too late, the nose may have dropped too 
far, and the angular velocity of the aeroplane have increased so much that he 
will find it difficult to push the nose up again. At the same time an unstable 
aeroplane like the "Snipe" will always respond to this correction more kindly 
than stable aeroplanes and as the involuntary inverted spin is to be avoided, 
the mistake of pushing forward the control stick too late is the less 
undesirable.

The slow half roll is most easily performed if the "Snipe" is flown at a speed 
in the neighbourhood of 100 m.p.h. Gerrard insisted on the necessity of 
selecting, If possible, some definite point on the horizon in order to 
stimulate the pilot's sense of direction. In half rolling to the right he 
pushed the control stick slowly and deliberately over to the right, meanwhile 
checking the tendency of the aeroplane to yaw off its course by gradually 
easing the control stick forward. With the steady application of right rudder 
the aeroplane then commenced to turn slowly over sideways. As the bank became 
steeper the control stick was eased more forward still, especially after the 
wings had passed the vertical. At this point Gerrard gradually reversed his 
rudder (gave left rudder) until by the time that the aeroplane was completely 
inverted he had centralised it again. It will be noted that this use of 
reversed rudder in the final stages of the slow half roll differs from that in 
the "Camel," where the rudder was employed in varying degree but always in the 
same sense as the rotation of the aeroplane. Though unusual, this method was 
applied by Scholefield to the S.E.5A. It at least shows the difference of 
technique employed by various pilots. Gerrard's forward movement of the 
control stick in the "Snipe" before the wings passed the vertical agrees with 
Bulman's in the "Camel"

3 The Effect of the Controls in Inverted Flight

(b) Application to Particular Aeroplanes

Standard Sopwith "Camel."-I flew the standard Sopwith "Camel'" inverted and 
found that although it answered less sensitively to the elevator than in 
normal flight, the difference was less than I expected. I was unable to fly it 
slower than 65 m.p.h. inverted, at which speed it stalled. To fly inverted at 
any given speed the position of the control stick is slightly forward of that 
for the corresponding speed in normal flight; at 75 m.p.h. inverted the 
control stick is just forward of the central position. As far as I could 
detect, at low speeds the lateral control disappeared first, and near stalling 
the aeroplane showed a strong tendency to drop the right wing when inverted. 
If I could not check this dropping at an early stage the aeroplane frequently 
fell out from the inverted position in a half roll with severe sideslip. I 
found it quite possible to watch the airspeed indicator when inverted and fly 
steadily at a given speed. The tendency of the' right wing to drop was 
particularly noticeable just after the half roll to become inverted.

I attempted to examine the stability characteristics inverted with engine off. 
The aeroplane was tail heavy in normal flight, and seemed to have a stable 
trimming speed at about 90 m.p.h. in inverted flight with engine off. This I 
investigated by abandoning the control stick when inverted, meanwhile steering 
with the rudder. The aeroplane settled down to what appeared to be a steady 
glide at 90 m.p.h. with "hands off." This observation, however, should be 
accepted with the greatest caution, owing to the shortness of the period 
during which the aeroplane could be allowed to glide-while the trimming speed 
was under observation. The trimming speed was observed by producing an 
artificial disturbance in the neighbourhood of the supposed attitude of 
balance and investigating the nature of the oscillation set up. During 
inverted flight this is not an easy matter, as it is a physical strain to 
remain inverted for a sufficiently long time. It seemed however that if the 
control stick were pushed forward and released the speed tended to rise again 
towards 90 m.p.h. and what is more important, if the control stick were pulled 
slightly back and released the speed tended to drop and the nose to rise; in 
other words the aeroplane actually wanted to remain inverted. Nevertheless the 
control force required to upset this condition was very small, and the “Camel” 
is not highly stable inverted.

The inverted stall is a matter of interest. If the “Camel” is stalled in the 
inverted position, it drops its nose quite definitely and shows the stalling 
characteristics associated with longitudinal stability; Whereas in normal 
flight its stall shows the characteristics associated with instability, and is 
of a delayed and gradual character.

4 Resuming Normal Flight 
(b) Application to Particular Aeroplanes

Standard Sopwith "Camel."-To resume normal flight on the "Camel" by means of a 
half loop the pilot is compelled to lose some height, probably a minimum of 
300ft. As explained before, he can make a quick recovery only by swinging the 
aeroplane round without allowing it to gather speed in an inverted dive. The 
”Camel” tends to go into this high speed inverted dive less easily than more 
heavily loaded or less unstable types. If, however, the inverted dive gains 
headway, the pilot may lose 1,000 to 2,000ft. before he has resumed normal 
flight. In my opinion it was the pilot's failure to appreciate the 
characteristics of this inverted dive that led to many accidents and 
concurrent reports that the controls were ineffective, or the elevator 
"blanketed." The aeroplane loses height so rapidly, and the elevator control 
feels so uneven in swinging the aeroplane round that it was natural for pilots 
to blame the control. The pilot has undoubtedly to learn what practically 
amounts to a trick in using the control; and if he is flying below 2,000ft. he 
may, if inexperienced, quite easily strike the ground in this inverted dive. 
The behaviour of the aeroplane appears inconsistent; under some conditions it 
may need a firm deliberate elevator movement and under others a series of 
gentle ones. The ”Camel” itself is more likely to come round in a series of 
jerks than to plunge into the high-speed inverted dive. These jerks the pilot 
is inclined to check too violently, because in the various attitudes through 
which the aeroplane passes towards recovery the sensitivity of the elevator 
control varies, and lie cannot easily foresee what effect his control 
move*ments are going to have. He may overdo the checking movements, in which 
case the aeroplane will start trying to re-invert itself, and he will lose a 
great deal of time and height in pulling it round to normal flight. In short, 
if the rapid low speed recovery is made, all is well; but if it fails, the 
pilot will meet difficulties that can only be overcome by practice (see Fig. 
V.).

An experienced pilot can resume normal flight by means of a slow half roll 
without losing more than 100 to 200ft. of height. He should not commence the 
manoeuvre too near the inverted stalling speed; on the “Camel” a favourable 
speed is 80 m.p.h. He gives aileron and rudder in the desired sense of roll 
and pushes the control stick slightly forward. As mentioned before, Bulman was 
able to use a further forward position of the control stick than I was. Just 
after the wings have passed the vertical the pilot has to be careful with his 
rudder. Its use is determined by his effort to keep the nose of the aeroplane 
as far as possible in the direction in which the half roll was commenced. The 
aeroplane will inevitably sideslip and yaw slightly off Its course. As soon as 
the wings are past the vertical the pilot can pull the control stick back to 
keep the nose up and gently or rapidly take off aileron, depending on how fast 
the aeroplane is coming round. If, however, he has lost too much speed, the 
aeroplane may swing round violently and the ailerons become useless. The 
motion can then be damped only by pushing the control stick forward again and 
allowing the nose to drop. To maintain an even rate of roll from start to 
finish the pilot must use good judgment in timing the control movements.

PART III -SPECIAL INVERTED MANEOUVRES

The Inverted Spin

In reference to accidents on "A" the report of the Accidents Committee, R.& M. 
617, states " Thirteen accidents in which inverted flight was a feature were 
examined.... The initial stage of the accidents varied, but in 10 out of 13 
cases the aeroplane at some period spun on its back."

It was hoped that the inverted spinning associated with these accidents might 
be reproduced; that the problem of recovery might be solved; that the 
behaviour of the aeroplane prior to, during and subsequent to the inverted 
spin might be investigated to see if the control surfaces were sufficiently 
operative to make consistent and repeated recovery possible; and that a pilot 
with his brain clear might experience the physiological effects concurrent 
with inverted spinning.

During the summer of 1920 Bulman was making persistent efforts to reproduce 
the inverted spin on the Sopwith “Camel” but, curiously enough, he was always 
unsuccessful for the reason shown later. In the following autumn Gerrard 
joined the R.A. E. and reported that in 1917 he performed the manoeuvre 
unintentionally while commencing inverted flight on a Sopwith "Camel" with a 
standard non-shoulder strap belt. To attain the inverted position he held on 
to the seat with his left hand, half rolled and pushed the control stick 
forward (the correct movements). He forgot, however, to centralise the rudder 
when he became inverted, and went into an inverted spin with the engine off. 
He was thrown from his seat, still retaining hold with his left hand. To save 
himself from being thrown out further, his first effort was to grab hold of 
the seat with his right hand also. Being confused, he seized hold of the 
pressure pump handle instead, which partially broke away; in fact he nearly 
pulled it right out. By this time he was getting very low - about 800ft. from 
the ground - and with a final effort succeeded in reaching the control stick 
with his right hand, pulled it back and made a recovery just before striking 
the ground. He did not proceed further with inverted flying until he had 
obtained and fitted a Curtis shoulder strap belt. Since then he had frequently 
carried out intentional inverted spins.

On joining the R.A. E. be explained to Bulman how the inverted spin was 
performed, and Bulman was able to go straight up and reproduce the manoeuvre 
perfectly. The normal method of including a right-hand inverted spin from the 
pilots point of view is to push the control stick fully forward into the 
left-hand corner of the cockpit and to give full right rudder, which means 
that rudder is given in the desired sense of rotation and aileron against it. 
For a left-hand inverted spin, the control movements are reversed. In the 
"Camels" previously flown by Gerrard the consequent motion of the aeroplane 
was as follows:- The aeroplane did a flat turn inverted, dropped its nose and 
commenced to spin on its back in a somewhat similar way to a normal spin. 
Gerrard described the recovery as not essentially abnormal except that the 
controls bad to be used with the greatest gentleness to prevent the aeroplane 
coming out with a violent jerk, and that the height loss exceeded that in the 
recovery from the normal spin. It is best to check the spinning, in the case 
of a right-hand inverted spin, by moving the control stick across from the 
front left-hand comer of the cockpit towards the centre of the dashboard 
(taking off aileron), and by centralising the rudder gradually. The aeroplane 
may then be eased out of the resultant inverted dive by gently pulling the 
control stick back. In the case of a left-hand inverted spin the control 
movements for recovery are made in the opposite sense. In a good recovery the 
height toss should not exceed that from a normal spin by more than 20 per 
cent. in a bad recovery it may run into thousands of feet (see Fig. VII.).

The “Camel" on which Bulman had been experimenting showed a strong tendency at 
low speeds to drop the right wing inverted [Part 11. (3) (b)]. Gerrard flew it 
and considered that this tendency was more marked than in the “camels” in 
which be had previously flown. It was this individual peculiarity that seems 
to have confused Bulman in his initial attempts at inverted spinning. Gerrard 
found that when the control movements for the inverted spin were made this 
aeroplane, instead of flat turning on to its back and sliding into a spin 
immediately, tended to drop the right wing and roll round the right way. If 
the controls were still held over, it rolled over again on to its back and 
commenced an inverted spin, by which time the nose had dropped to about 45 
deg. with the horizontal. In attempting the inverted spin Bulman, finding that 
the aeroplane rolled round right away, immediately straightened it out in the 
belief that he had failed, and never guessed that if he persisted an inverted 
spin would result. Nevertheless when I tried the inverterted spin on this 
aeroplane, in no case did I experience the tendency to roll out before the 
Spin had commenced, which must have been due to a slight difference in 
handling the controls. Bullman lays emphasis on the extraordinary smoothness 
of the inverted spin. There is no suggestion of "kicking" round, a frequent 
feature of the normal spin on the "Camel" He also noticed that by taking off 
ruder slowly he could decrease the rate of rotation.

Although in my initial attempts at inverted night on the Sopwith "Camel” I had 
several times mishandled the controls, it so happened that I had not, as a 
result, commenced an involuntary inverted spin. As I was anxious to gain 
experience of the manoeuvre I carried out a considerable number of inverted 
spins. I judged that it would be a matter of considerable difficulty to read 
instruments in this condition; in any case I was compelled to concentrate on 
reading one at a time. In ordinary inverted flying it is possible to read 
between two or three instruments at once. Having previously shut off the 
engine and petrol, I commenced inverted spinning by half rolling gently on to 
my back at 5,000ft, and producing an inverted glide. I steadied the airspeed 
to 80 m.p.h. and then gently eased the control stick forward and to my left 
and gave full right rudder. The aeroplane showed no hesitation in answering. 
It did a flat turn to the right, and started spinning inverted with the nose 
fairly well down, in a roughly similar attitude, except for the inversion, top 
that of a normal spin.

I agree with Bulman that the inverted spin is unlike the characteristic 
“Camel” spin; it seems both smoother, and there is no “kicking” noticeable. As 
soon as the spin commenced I felt the negative acceleration increase, and the 
belt stretched a little. I was able, howver to read the airspeed, which 
settled down to 90 m.p.h. The pitot head is mounted on the starboard wing 
strut, which would be the inner one in the spin. Its reading in an incerted 
spin would probably be subject to a considerable correction.

After spinning for 1,500ft. I gently eased the control stick towards the 
centre of the dashboard and then backwards, simultaneously centralising the 
rudder. After what seemed like one and a half turns the rotation slowed up, 
started again momentarily, and then ceasedl; after which I emerged in an 
inverted dive. In this dive I attained a considerable speed, over 160 m.p.h., 
being reluctant to handle the aeroplane roughly and flatten out too violently. 
This procedure however, involved the sacrifice of about 1,500ft. of height, 
and my nose crosses the horizon at 2,000ft. Just as in the half-looping 
recovery from the inverted position, the speed in the inverted dive tends to 
rise very rapidly, and it is essential always to aim at the low speed 
recovery. In such dives I have more than once attained speeds in the 
neighbourhood of 200 m.p.h. During the inverted spin proper the pilot, though 
subject to violent negative acceleration, is quite able to realise where he is 
and visualise his attitude; during the recovery and consequent reversal of the 
sign of apparent gravity, he tends to feel dizzy for a few moments.

One of the most important things to discover about the inverted spin was at 
least an approximate notion of the loads imposed on the wings, and hence the 
margin of strength. I was therefore anxious if possible to measure the 
acceleration in the spin, and had a simple type of spring accelerometer 
(non-recording} fitted between the guns so that it was close to my face and 
easy to read. This accelerometer was used by Lindeman in his early spinning 
experiments. I commenced inverted spinning at 5,000ft. in the same way as 
before. The indicator of .the accelerometer appeared to rise steadily but 
quickly to -2G, and to remain there for as long as I was able to watch it. At 
about 3,500ft. I had intended to make the control movements for recovery. I 
was, however, beginning to be confused, and think that while centralising the 
rudder I may have kept the control stick forward or have failed to pull it 
back enough. When I next appreciated what was happening I was gliding fast on 
my back at about 120 m.p.h., side*slipping with my right wing down. It took me 
a few moments to decide whether I was inverted or not, as, having been 
subjected to large unusual accelerations, my sense of feel seemed partially 
paralysed. On realising the position I gently eased the aeroplane into an 
inverted dive and recovered normal flight at just under 2,000ft. I 
subsequently read the accelerometer in a straight inverted glide, and its 
reading was approximately -1G.

Up to that time it had been an open question whether it was possible to pass 
direct from an inverted spin to inverted flight, the normal recovery being an 
inverted dive. That I did so unintentionally proves the possibility of it; 
indeed, the manoeuvre virtually amounts to the first phase of an inverted 
loop. It was unfortunate that I was unable to control myself sufficiently 
during this period to read the accelerometer, as the reading should have been 
of interest. The fact that I passed direct into the inverted position in 
trying to recover from an inverted spin, seems to point to the persistence of 
habit formed during normal spinning the recovery from which requires the 
control stick forward. Although I had clearly thought out the whole manoeuvre 
beforehand, yet when the time came for recovery I failed to make the 
subconscious effort to pull the control stick back.

I carried out another right hand inverted spin and was able to watch the 
spring accelerometer more carefully. During the spin the indicator oscillated 
between -1.8 and -2.2 G, the period of the oscillation being approximately in 
phase with the rotation of the aeroplane. Bulman then carried out two left 
hand inverted spins and observed a similar oscillation between -1.6 and -2.4 G.

Later on a recording accelerometer was fitted up and a record that I obtained 
in a right hand inverted spin is shown diagrammatically in Fig. VIII. For 
purposes of comparison a record of a straight inverted glide is shown in Fig. 
IX. The maximum force on the wings during the inverted spin is seen to be -1.7 
G, a figure lower than that obtained from the non-recording spring 
accelerometer. Taking into account the conditions under which the latter had 
to be observed by the pilot, great reliance cannot be placed on the readings 
taken from it.

I therefore made tests on the standard "Camel" to investigate the influence of 
aileron. I first tried to induce an inverted spin by flying inverted, pushing 
the control stick forward without giving aileron and applying full rudder. The 
”Camel” did not appear to respond quite as readily as with aileron given 
against the sense of rotation but fell into an inverted spin for about a turn 
and a half, threw itself violently out and began to gather speed. I then tried 
again by inducing an inverted spin with aileron against the sense of rotation 
and slowly moving the ailerons during the spin until they were fully over m 
the same sense as the rotation. The spin slowed up slightly and became less 
even, but still persisted until I made the movements for recovery. These tests 
showed that for inverted spinning the position of the elevators and rudder was 
more important than that of the ailerons. This point has a distinct bearing on 
the chances of falling into an involuntary inverted spin by a mishandling of 
the controls.

3 Conclusions

Time and height are then necessary for recovery, though it is suggested that 
the standard Sopwith "Camel" may be stable inverted, it is a fact that no 
control forces of any magnitude are requisite to Overcome the effect of this 
stability