http://riseofflight.com/forum/viewtopic.php?f=49&t=30890&start=30

Sopwith Camel replica

extract from P1lot magazine November 1981

Engine: Warner Super Scarab

Right from the beginning my relationship with the Sopwith Camel was one of love, fright and freezing. I loved her because she was utterly unique, and a part of our heri­tage. She frightened me by what might be euphemistically termed her 'handling qualities', and also by her engine's depressing propensity for going to sleep on the job. And she froze me nigh to insensibility on all but the balmiest of summer days; no other aero­plane I have ever flown exposes its proprietor to the gale of its pas­sage in quite the same way.

I first made acquaintance with her because a friend's friend was looking for pilots for the Leisure Sport Warbirds display team of World War I aircraft. She was a replica, of course - but what a replica! This was no scaled-down mewling puppy of an aeroplane; this was the works, full-sized and seemingly of monstrous propor­tions, dwarfing a Tiger Moth and making a Pitts look like a control­-line model. She was, moreover, built (by that great character Viv Bellamy) almost entirely to the original plans, the only real departure from 1916 being the use of a Warner Super Scarab radial engine in place of the original Clerget or le Rhone rotary.

Sitting in her with the engine running for the first time, my elation became tinged with certain thoughtfulness. I had never flown behind a Scarab before, and this one sounded like several advanced TB cases staging a coughing contest (Which I later found is the way all Scarabs sound). Furthermore, the whole aircraft was shaking in sympathy - not with the eager vibration of most biplanes before they take to the air, but a sort of dispirited shivering as if a collection of geriatric spare parts were all trembling with their own individual agues. The long flying wires twanged like loose harp­ strings, and the bottom wings exhibited a peculiar rippling shudder as they drifted in and out of some harmonic of their own. ~ And on top of all this there was the Rotherham pump twiddling away none too far from my starboard ear. This device is a wind­driven airpump with a twelve-inch propeller. It works rather like a model aeroplane engine in reverse, and its function is to pressurise the Camel's fuel tank in order to perpetuate the flow of fuel to the engine. In the First War the Rotherham pump was mounted in various places on the aircraft, apparently according to the constructor's whim of the moment. Some Camels had them on a forward centre section strut; some had them on a rear; and still others had them mounted down below on an undercarriage leg. This one, for some undisclosed reason, had the infernal thing on the starboard rear centre section strut, just where the driver in a moment of inattention could stick his mush into the propeller arc. There was certain inevitability about this, and the only surprise was that when it eventually happened it was someone else who got a quick-release ear.

Taxying a Sopwith Camel, I next found, is a matter which demands considerable attention. Rudder response at taxying speed is nil to zero unless you indulge in great blasts of power to blow the tail round. But if you do this you also make the aeroplane go faster -and this is not desirable because the Camel has very low wing­loading coupled with marked dihedral on the bottom Wings, so that if she is pressed to proceed cross-wind at more than a sedate waddle she exhibits a most alarming tendency to roll over on her back.

In contrast, the take-off is no problem at all -or at least, once again, it is no problem provided you are pointing exactly into wind: if you are not, there is a most interesting few seconds while the into-wind wing tries to climb up over your head. Normally you just open up, pick the tail up, and the Camel grinds placidly into the air a few seconds later, after an incredibly short ground roll.

Then on the first flight, your flying lesson begins. Sitting amid the noise and wind, staring at the world between the barrels of the twin Vickers guns, the realisation rapidly comes upon you that the controls of this flying machine feel most peculiar. The rudder and elevator are very light and sensitive while the ailerons are astonishingly heavy, and appear to have practically no effect on anything at all. Heaving the stick from side to side produces a sort of drunken wallowing, like a politician trying to duck out of a commitment. A suspicious glance at the vibrating wings reveals that the ailerons are in fact still connected up -and the sight of them moving sluggishly in the airflow suggests the answer to the conundrum: the Camel has four enormous ailerons, and they are quite simply far too big. Furthermore, they have all the design subtlety of a quartet of barn doors. Frise effect, slotting, balancing, differential -these weren't even words in the aviation dictionary in 1916 when this lady was conceived, if you wanted your aeroplane to roll faster you just made the ailerons bigger. (And then, presumably, wondered why it didn't roll faster ... ) Those huge control surfaces so degrade the airflow over the wings that not only is their primary effect vastly blunted, but at the same time the drag thus engendered is awe-inspiring. Adverse yaw completely overcomes the normal secondary effect of roll, so that if you are so misguided as to take your feet off the Camel's rudder and then bank (say) to the left, the stubby round nose will instantly zap off to the right and keep going. Coupled with basic yaw instability, this characteristic is so pronounced that the aeroplane's 'natural' flight regime is in fact the side-slip: if you let go of everything she will immediately rack herself into the steepest slip­ping turn she can manage. All this combines to create a weird feeling of flying on a knife-edge when you first clatter into the air. It takes several minutes before the realisation trickles through that this loutish yawl-roll combination is not so much actively dangerous as merely different: this is flying a la 1916, and the cosseting comforts of inherent directional stability and effective aileron technology are many years in the future. One is just left reflecting that if the Camel was one of the best of the World War I flying machines, Gawd only knows what the worst were like ...

These first few minutes aloft are interesting for other reasons, as well. On my first flight, for example, so overcome was I with the awesome control disharmony that I did for some minutes forget to check the fuel pressure gauge. When I finally ducked down to peer at it on the shivering and rudimentary instrument panel the needle was sitting on four or five psi, way over the 2 1/2 psi red-line. The transition from ground-running to flight had caused the Rotherham pump to speed up and vastly over-pressurise the fuel tank, an event which I had been sternly warned was Not A Good Thing. With visions of the tank going off like a bomb six inches behind my seat, I grabbed for the manual pressure relief valve in the cockpit and opened it fully. A jet of Vaporising fuel shot across my knees from the nozzle, and the pressure needle promptly sank to zero. I shut off the valve, gave the hand wobble-pump a few strokes to stoke things up a bit and the bloody fuel pressure immediately went off the clock again. Becoming aware (quite correctly) that this was my initiation into what was obviously going to be an ongoing problem in Camel driving, I then strove vainly to find a position for the highly sensitive relief valve lever which would maintain something like the correct pressure.

I was thus engaged when my eye was arrested by the oil pressure needle, which was sinking slowly in the west.. The time had come, it rather seemed, to place the aeroplane back on the ground.
In the event this proved easier than I had expected, the only mildly exciting moment being when I initiated the final side-slip. Conventional slip entry - with bottom stick and top rudder - is a marked overkill in the Camel, since slipping 'is what it naturally wants to do anyway. My first attempt produced a lurch like a double­decker bus falling over, immediately followed by the discovery that slipping this particular bird requires bottom stick and bottom rudder pressure, to prevent the manoeuvre tightening up on itself.

After that the actual landing was an anti-climax. The Camel sits down slowly and gracefully in any attitude between wheeler and three-pointer, and the big bungee undercarriage gives a nice soft ride rather like a Tiger Moth. The only critical thing is that once again you must be exactly into wind, and you must also be ready with the beetle-crushers to keep it straight. Swaying around on top of those tall wheels the Camel always feels as if she's about to ground-loop, but never actually does. (Well ... not very often, anyway).

So ended my first Camel flight, after six minutes in the air. When everything came to a stop it was suddenly quiet enough to hear myself think: and I remember hearing myself thinking that any prolonged association with this flying machine was likely to prove an interesting and educational experience, to say the least. I was right: My next flight, which was supposedly a cross­country, ended after twelve minutes when an oil pipe broke and lubricated my plates-of-meat instead of the engine. I placed the aeroplane on the ground at -of all places -a Royal Naval helicopter station, gliding dead-stick past the tower towards a patch of grass while some genius on the balcony flashed a frantic red light at me. The next flight lasted five minutes before the oil pressure packed up again. So did the next flight. And on the flight after that, due entirely to my own pig-headedness I did contrive to become lost in a snowstorm, which is a most unfunny proceeding in a Sopwith Camel. The only saving grace was that the Scarab at last relented and condescended to keep running. I emerged from the experience, very much shaken, to make my first unforced Camel landing. The relationship was taking shape.

The next round of the battle was aerobatics. All that time Leisure Sport had the Camel and their Fokker Triplane, along with a trio of Tiger Moths and various other items of machinery. To their ever­lasting credit they did not limit the old warbirds to normal flight, but actually encouraged us to perform mild aerobatics for our display routines. Thus I found that the Camel performed tight little loops, well-behaved spins, good stall-turns, and somewhat ponderous barrel rolls. Slow rolls, however, were something else again. She would just about do it if you insisted, but you had to start at nigh on Vne , use both hands to crank on full aileron -and then wait. And wait. And wait. She took 23 seconds to go round (compared to about six seconds in, say, a Chipmunk), and that 23 seconds felt like a fortnight. After the first 100 degrees or so the engine would pack up and you were left rolling in hideous slow motion with only the howl of the wind in the wires for company. Treading the rudder very gently -for only a touch too much out-roll rudder would be enough to overcome the ailerons and stop the roll altogether, leaving you stuck on your back like some helpless airborne turtle -you finally regained erect flight with perhaps 80 mph left ,whereupon you had to wait several more seconds before the Scarab would cough and splutter and belch and finally struggle back to its normal asthmatic blattering. (In the end I did slow rolls at three or four shows before sanity prevailed and I dropped the exercise as being too hard on both the airframe and the nervous system).