SOPWITH CAMEL: A REALISTIC JSBSIM FLIGHT MODEL - NOTES

Version 1.8

Brent Hugh, 28 May 2013

brent@brenthugh.com

PURPOSE

In flying the existing Sopwith Camel flight models in Flightgear with Bombable 
in simulated combat situations, the shortcomings of these flight models became 
apparent. Flightgear flight models are typically designed and optimized for 
flying aircraft well within their design envelopes, and work very well in 
those situations.

However, combat aircraft are often operated near the limits--or even over the 
limits--of their documented capabilities. Particularly for an aircraft like 
the Camel, working with and against the quirks of its design was an integral 
part of operating the aircraft in both everyday operations and in combat. 
These operational quirks were openly exploited by combat pilots.

As one writer said:

  I enjoyed flying the Camel, but its vices of control instability, extreme 
  control sensitivity and pronounced gyroscopic effects all combined to create 
  the impression of balancing an egg on the point of a needle rather than flying 
  an aircraft . . .

  It was never forced into manoeuvres - they were executed by light pressure on 
  the controls and subsequently relaxing, or sometimes reversing, the pressure 
  once the desired rate of response was attained.

I set out to create a flight model of the Camel that would incorporate as many 
of the documented combat flight characteristics of the Camel as possible, and 
in as realistic a way as possible.

Technical and operations manuals of the Camel are available that give a 
baseline for its capabilities and operation, and the JSBSim flight model now 
very closely matches those public specifications. However, extensive wind 
tunnel testing data, which would give far more detailed data about performance 
of the aircraft in different situations--and which is often available for more 
modern aircraft--is not available for the Camel as far as I know.

For that reason, I have relied on detailed reports by pilots of historical and 
modern Sopwith Camels, which give an account of characteristics, quirks, and 
typical solutions used by pilots, and used these first-hand sources to guide 
the development of the flight model.

CAMEL FLIGHT CHARACTERISTICS IMPLEMENTED IN THE FDM

Camel flight characteristics are documented below and in the included files.

Below is a list of Camel flight characteristics implemented in this JSBSim 
flight model, with a rating of the effectiveness of the current implementation 
on a scale of 1-5:

1 - Not implemented

2 - Partially implemented

3 - Well implemented

4 - As well implemented as possible, as far as I (a non-pilot) can determine 

5 - As well implemented as possible, according to an expert Camel pilot


4 Weight, fuel capacity & weight, hp, dimensions and other technical details 
implemented as described in attached article, 'The Sopwith "Camel"', The 
Automobile, Nov 7, 1918.

4 Best available calculations for moment of inertia of engine/propellor, prop 
thrust, moment of inertia of aircraft wings and body. See included file 
Camel-JSBSim-calcs-2011-10D.xls. NOTE: These results could/should be verified 
and improved by actual measurement and testing of an aircraft, by wind tunnel 
data, or by extensive testing and feedback of the model by an experienced 
Camel pilot.

4 Speed, RPM, horsepower of climbing and horizontal flight closes matches 
published number. See for example the speed/climb rate graphs comparing the 
JSBSim Camel and a historical 1917 Camel in the Docs subdirectory, file 
Camel-JSBSim-calcs-2011-10D.xls NOTE: 2013/04/07, with new lift/drag tables 
need to re-check the speed/climb rates to make sure they still match 
historical records NOTE: The numbers to not match exactly, of course--tweaking 
parameters in JSBSim you can match any single parameter exactly put not 
several parameters of different types exactly. Nevertheless the results are 
very close, definitely show the characteristics of the Camel (vs any of the 
other similar aircraft of the period) and in fact is probably close enough to 
be within the bounds of individual variation of production Camels. TODO: Retest 
these items on Ver 1.6; tweak dive rate/speed to better match historical Camel.

3 Max sustained turn rate about 76 deg/sec, ie 360 degrees in 4.7 seconds 
(near stall speed, level flight, sea level). NOTE: Current best time is about 
8-10 seconds; this matches reported times by Camel pilots of the time and the 
4.7 sec/76 deg/sec might not be the most reliable number?

4 Flown basically with rudder and elevator; rudder initiates turns etc and 
ailerons only used as assist; many pilots didn't use ailerons much.

3 Able to turn through 360 degrees (including roll in/out) in 8-10 seconds as 
reported by WWI era Camel pilots. 

4 Quick/light response to controls

4 The gyroscopic effect causes the nose to rise in a left-hand turn (moreso 
that most other similar aircraft)

4 The gyroscopic effect causes nose to drop in a right-hand turn

4 Fairly large amounts of left rudder were needed in both L & R turns to 
correct

4 Sluggish in left turns. Quicker through 270 degrees to the right than 90 
degrees to the left. NOTE: This is noticeable on flat, level, coordinated turns 
at steady speed, may not be as dramatic as historic accounts indicate.  In Ver. 
1.6 this effect is more obvious.

4 Known for stalling/spinning on take-off if inattentive piloting let nose 
rise during initial LH turn.

4 Sensitive in a turn, if the turn were tightened just a little, it was likely 
to whip into a tight spin.

4 All the weight of the engine, guns, and pilot was concentrated in the first 
seven feet of a short 18-foot fuselage.

3.5 Spins: Period of 1-2 seconds.  In Ver. 1.6 the stall and spin 
characteristics we re-tweaked; this area may still need more work.

3 Loses 150-200 feet per revolution while spinning. NOTE: Loses about 125ft 
per revolution, may need further tweaking.  Needs re-checking in ver. 1.6.

4 Exit spin by gentle forward pressure in the stick, then *gradually* pull 
out. AC will *sometimes* self-recover from a spin, but many times not.

2.5 General spin characteristics similar to Camel; ability to do spin-related 
maneuvers documented for the Camel--snap rolls, etc. Note that 'snap rolls' as 
often described in relation to the Camel appear to not be true aerobatic snap 
rolls as we would perform today (too vigorous for the Camel's light airframe) 
but a kind of roll coordinated between rudder & aileron.

3.7 Possible to fly inverted.  Stalls at about 65 mph/56 knots when flying 
inverted. TODO: Tweak exact stall speed.

3 In inverted flight, possible to stall and get into an inverted spin.

3.8 Camel's elevator was powerful and sensitive. 

3.9 Rudder was too small and relatively ineffective.

3.9 Straight/forward flight requires slight right rudder at all times.

3.8 Roll for turns initiated by rudder (due to large adverse yaw/drag of 
ailerons); ailerons use to control roll in turns rather than initiate.

4 Accelerating the aircraft caused the nose to climb, and swing to the left.

4 At 110 miles per hour, there was about 15 to 20 pounds of back force on the 
control column, which could not be trimmed out because the aircraft had no 
pilot-adjustable, moveable horizontal stabilizer.

3.8 Moving the stick forward to enter a dive caused the Camel to yaw left 
because of gyroscopic force, and correcting this yaw with right rudder caused 
the nose to pitch down sharply. 

4 Steerable tail skid of the Camel helped to overcome a slight swing to the 
left as I opened the throttle.  (This seems to be only a feature of replica 
Camels, however it is implemented in FG as otherwise there is no way to 
maneuver the A/C on the ground. In WWI ground crew would have been used instead.)

4 The tail came up at about 20 knots.

4 Lifts off about 35-40 knots

4 Able to take off & land in a very short distance, especially on a field and 
with a headwind--see for instance: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VT9wtDNiKaI 
With a 15 mph headwind, JSBSim Camel now matches this takeoff almost exactly. 
The rollout matches pretty well, too--though obviously much depends on the 
exact surface and other details.

3.5 Right rudder needed to keep AC on course early in roll-out.

3 Left rudder needed later in roll-out as speed increases. NOTE: The JSBSim 
current requires R rudder on takeoff, not left, and not quite full rudder. Not 
certain of the reason for this.

3 Rudder loses effectiveness as soon as it drops on landing. NOTE: JSBSim 
implements steering in the taildragger when it's touching ground. This may not 
be 100% authentic, but otherwise it's just impossible to maneuver the Camel on 
the ground in FG!

4 In a wind of 10 to 15 knots you are airborne in a couple of plane lengths 
at 35 mph. 

4 Rate of climb of almost 1,000 feet a minute climbing out of take-off.  
TODO: Need to verify/tweak exact climb rates & match to historical data.

4 Capable of looping, 110 mph required.

4 Being slightly tail-heavy it goes up and over in an incredibly small circle 
in the sky, and faster than any other WWI aircraft I have flown.

4 Tail heavy with full fuel

4 Slightly nose heavy with empty fuel. 

4 Ineffective ailerons: Slow roll/ailerons only with level flight requires 
23 seconds to complete--if it can be done at all (it requires a special 
technique).  This is reported in a radial engine replica; it is duplicated in 
Ver. 1.4 almost exactly, with the added feature that roll to the L is 
noticeable faster/easier than roll to the R, due to large torque of Clerget 
rotary engine.

4 Ailerons induce 'awe-inspiring' opposite yaw (ie, yaw to the R on L roll) 
and much drag.  

4 Starting at level flight, adding full left aileron just moves the nose to 
the right and it stays there. You don't start rolling right until you 
coordinate with the rudder as well. (And ditto for full R aileron.) 

4 In level flight at 100 mph indicated, just a hint of rudder is required 
for straight flight.

4 Thin airfoil shape affects lift, drag, AOA of stall, etc., and the effects 
are quite different than for later aircraft with thicker wings. Stall speed: 
Wikipedia and several other sources report 48 mph/41.7 knots.  However, this 
does not match up with the Camel's reputed quick turn rate.  Lower stall 
speed directly equates with quicker turn rate.  A replica Camel reports a 
stall speed under 40 MPH (35 knots) and Frank Tallman reports stall speed of 
35-40 mph (30.4-34.8 knots). A stall speed in this range seems to fit better 
with the Camel's reported turn rate.  

4 Current (Ver. 1.4+) drag/lift uses tweaked historical lift/drag curves for 
the Camel's wing shape and also the known historical zero-lift drag 
coefficient for the Camel.  

3 P factor - evidently the shape of the prop creates a somewhat higher P 
factor than for later similar aircraft, but the strength of this effect is an 
open question.

4 As you slow down over the top of the loop you must feed in rudder against 
the torque.

4 On strafing runs, as soon as the airspeed reaches 130 to 140 mph the nose 
begins to hunt up and down, and the elevator becomes extremely sensitive. I 
feel this action is due largely to the square windshield between the two 
Vickers guns, causing a substantial burble over the tail surfaces.

3.9 In stalls at 35 to 40 mph the nose drops frighteningly fast and hard to 
the right, but you also get control back quickly, although a surprising amount 
of altitude has been lost. I have had the pleasure of limited dog fighting 
with other WWI fighters, and there are none that can stay with a Camel in a 
turn. TODO: JSBSim model stalls almost exactly as described, but nose drops 
hard to L instead of R. This can likely be tweaked in the model.

4 Very quick half-roll (a touch of left rudder for a half roll, then a quick 
half-loop was a often-used maneuver to reverse direction).

4 Twin Vickers machine guns, 400 round capacity (historically 250-400 seems to 
have been the range), best known realistic mass, ballistic, and aerodynamic 
characteristics for rounds, firing rate, characteristics of tracer rounds, 
etc. Historically realistic re-loading scenario (requires landing, full stop, 
engine off). See camel-alternative-submodels.xml for information and 
documentation. NOTE: Aerodynamic characteristics of machine gun rounds could 
be tweaked if better data were available; tracer visuals could be made
more realistic.

3.8 Mixture needed constant manual adjustment; first adjustment about 250 ft 
above ground on liftoff. For highest realism, switch on manual mixture
using the Camel menu. TODO: Mixture and throttle adjustments are not as
tweaky as described by Camel pilots. Mixture lever or dial isn't implemented;
a simple Flightgear menu displays current mixture & RPM when manual mixture is 
enabled.

3.5 Control of engine thrust via blip switch and magneto rather than throttle. 
NOTE: Pilots can simulate the realistic historical way of controlling the 
Camel's engine using this method: Leave throttle at full position at all times;
manipulate engine power through use of the magnetos and blip switch alone. 
Engine power with one and with two magnetos engaged is very close to that 
described in technical specifications; operating with one magneto creates a 
low-power setting. TODO: A more realistic flight experience would be to 
connect the joystick throttle control to the mixture, allowing constant 
adjustment of the mixture as necessary, and leave throttle always at full with 
engine power adjusted by magnetos and blip switch.

3 Engine power with both magnetos or one magneto matches historical engines. 
NOTE: The one-magneto setting doesn't seem to match the historical Clerget 
power, not exactly sure how to address this given JSBSim's propulsion model.

4 Engine start. Camel engines were notoriously difficult to start. Given the 
manual engine starting methods of the day, they must have started either with a 
quick crank or not at all. NOTE: This is modeled by an approx. .5-1.5 second 
cranking period, initiated by the 's' key, which starts the engine about 1/4 
of attempts.

4 Engine runs out of fuel/stops when inverted or pulling negative Gs.   On  slow
roll (23 seconds), engine stops just  after  wings  vertical  and  starts  again
soon after regaining erect flight.   NOTE:  This  is  implemented  via  a  Nasal
routine that tracks fuel in a simple carburetor. Fuel  flows  or  out  depending
on the forces involved and when the carburetor  runs  out  of  fuel  the  engine
sputters and stops until the carburetor refills. 

4 Service ceiling 19,600 ft.  Tested in ver. 1.7, by the standard of highest altitude able to sustain 100 fpm climb (1.66 fps).

3.5 The 130HP Clerget Camel was generally lower performance/underperforming for altitudes greater than 10,000-12,000 feet.



SPECIFICATIONS

Cruising speed for Camel with 130 HP Clerget, per SopwithCamelSpecs-1955.pdf - 
Flight, "Sopwith Camel", 22 April 1955, is

                          115 mph @ 6500 ft
                          113 mph @ 10000 ft
                          106.5 mph @ 15000 ft
                         
                         Climb to
                          6500 ft = 6 min 0 sec
                          10000 ft = 10 min 35 sec
                          15000 ft = 20 min 40 sec

DOCUMENTS
A number of relevant documents and notes, including facsimiles, articles, and 
calculations, are included in the Docs folder of this distribution.

Below is a compilation of notes and comments by pilots with experience flying 
the Camel.

---

Sopwith F.1 Camel;

Clerget 9B;

Wg 1 482

We 962

b 28.0

  18.8

S 231

Wg/S 6.4

Wg/Po11.4


Vmax 105 (at 10,000 ft)

Vs 48

Cd0 0.0378

f 8.73

A 4.11

L/Dmax 7.7

http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/pao/History/SP-468/app-a.htm

---

Based on the information contained in appendix II of reference 100 for the later 
Sopwith Snipe, the gyroscopic action of the engine caused a nose-up moment in a 
left turn and a nose-down moment in a right turn. Accordingly, left stick, a 
large amount of left rudder, and moderate back stick were required in a steep 
left turn; too much back stick caused the aircraft to stall and spin. Right 
stick, a moderate amount of left rudder, and full back stick were required in a 
steep right turn. There seems little doubt that these odd control techniques 
could cause confusion and indecision on the part of an inexperienced pilot.

100. Penrose, Harold: British Aviation. The Great War and Armistice - 1915-1919 (London: Putnam & Co., 1969).

http://history.nasa.gov/SP-468/ch2-2.htm

---

R&M 592 Report on Accidents to Certain Aeroplanes with Special Reference to 
Spinning - Aeronautical Research Committee

*Note: This report refers to the Camel as "A"*

II. BEHAVIOUR OF "A"

4. During the course of the investigation the Committee had the advantage of 
evidence on the behaviour of various aeroplanes from fourteen pilots with wide 
flying experience.

5. On many of the most important points their opinion was unanimous. Where 
differences occurred the contradiction was more apparent than real, and 
further evidence showed that such difference did not affect the actual 
manoeuvre. For instance, some pilots make use of the lateral control, but an 
agree that this does not materially affect the spinning of an aeroplane.

6. All the pilots agreed that the machine A had certain peculiarities which 
may be summarised as follows :*

GENERAL CHARACTERISICS.

7. (a) Stalling.-A as usually rigged is tail heavy and longitudinally 
unstable. This is accentuated when a light Le Rhone engine is substituted for 
a heavier Clerget and/or where guns and ammunition are removed.

During normal horizontal flight, it is necessary to keep a continuous forward 
pressure of about 14 Ibs. on the control column. Any relaxation of the pilot's 
effort is therefore likely to end in a stall. Because of the longitudinal 
instability of the aeroplane engine failure will be followed by a stall unless 
the pilot dives the machine.

8. (b) Turning.--Most of the pilots, in the course of their evidence drew 
attention to the fact that a steeply-banked right hand turn requires full left 
rudder. This is accounted for by gyroscopic effect.

9. The unsymmetrical forces and couples on an aeroplane arise from engine 
torque, slipstream and the gyroscopic couple. The first two, torque and 
slipstream, may produce an unsymmetric setting of the ailerons and rudder 
respectively. They do not produce effects which depend on the rate of turning 
to any appreciable extent. The gyroscopic couple alone is capable of 
explaining the effect mentioned above.

10. The propeller, viewed from the pilot's seat, turns clockwise, and when the 
aeroplane is turning to the right it tends to put its nose down as a 
consequence of the gyroscopic couple. The tendency is countered by left rudder 
and back (or top) elevator. Turning to the left, the nose of the aeroplane 
tends to go up, and this effect is countered by left rudder and forward (or 
bottom) elevator.

From the evidence of the witnesses it is apparent that practically all flyers 
feel strongly the need of a larger rudder surface.

14. (d) Looping.-In the case of A all violent use of the controls must be 
avoided. With the stick pulled too hard back, the machine will fail to 
complete the loop. Further, if a straight loop is required, left rudder must 
be used to counteract gyroscopic effect, and it was stated by one witness that 
the rudder was barely sufficient for this manoeuvre.

15 (e) Spinning.-The general method adopted when getting into a tight hand 
spin is :* 

(i) Cut off engine.

(ii) Pull back control stick.

(iii) Put on right rudder. This describes the action usually taken, but the 
essential feature is that the machine is slowed down until it stalls, when the 
normal sequence is a spin.

16. There is general agreement as to the position of the controls when in a 
spin. The essential feature is that the stick is kept hard back; the position 
of rudder and ailerons is relatively unimportant.

17. The normal method of coming out of a spin is with the control stick 
slightly forward and other controls neutral. In this position the spin will 
soon stop, out the nose of the machine must be held down until flying speed is 
attained, when the stick should be pulled gently back, and the machine is 
flattened out.

In the case of an emergency, the spin can be stopped more rapidly by putting 
the stick forward and reversing the rudder, but in this case a violent 
manoeuvre is induced, and want of skill may lead to the machine dropping back 
into the reverse spin.

18. It appears to be established that the rotation cannot be reversed without 
an intermediate period, during which the machine is re-stalled. This does not 
require the fuselage to be brought to a horizontal position.

19. As usually rigged, the aeroplane A will not come out of the spin with 
hands off, and will only come out slowly, if at all, with all the controls 
held strictly central.

21. There is no aeroplane at present in use which spins faster than A; its 
time period is 1 to 2 seconds, and the loss of height per turn 150 to 200 feet.

23. Accidents due to spinning.-The Committee have considered 41 accidents to 
machine A due to stalling and spinning. These accidents can be divided into 
two groups :* Group (i) includes accidents due to stalls at low level. Group 
(ii) includes accidents due to spins continued to the ground from a high 
level. A classified list will be found in Appendix IV.

24. On all aeroplanes loss of control occurs when stalled. At a low level this 
results in a nose dive or spin, and an accident ensues as lack of head room 
precludes the completion of the manoeuvre before the ground is reached. 
Accidents in group (0 belong to this category. The common feature is that the 
stall was unintentional, the primary cause of the stall varying (e.g., engine 
failure, faulty turn, general inexperience).

38. In cases where previous dual instruction on A is impossible the movements 
necessary in a spin must be impressed so forcibly on the pupil that they will 
return to his mind subconsciously when the difficulty arises. The routine 
method is :

(i) Stick forward and central and rudder central.
(ii) Wait for the machine to acquire flying speed.
(iii) Pull out gently."

Source: http://www.theaerodrome.com/forum/aircraft/56275-question-ways-get-killed-sopwith-camel-4.html

---

Max sustained turn rate is about 76 deg/sec. That is near stall speed, level 
flight, at sea level. p. 7 

A graph of speed vs climb rate is given for the Camel and four other
aircraft from the same era (p. 7).  

http://home.comcast.net/~clipper-108/AIAAPaper2005-119.pdf 

Not su

---

"I lived its quick response - it was so remarkably swift and sensitive that it 
demanded constant attention. The torque caused the nose to rise in a left-hand 
turn and drop in a right-hand turn. Fairly large amounts of left rudder were 
needed in both turns to correct for these idiosyncrasis. The tiny biplane was 
so sensitive in a turn, however, that if the turn were tightened just a little,
it was likely to whip into a tight spin - quickly and without warning. Oddly 
this very ease for spinning was used in combat by many pilots to shake a 
persisten German from their tails. Sopwith Camel vs Fokker Dr 1: Western Front 
1917-18 by Jon Guttman, Harry Dempsey, quoting from mark Curtis Kinney's 
memoir, I Flew a Camel

---

Here is a description about the Camel's traits from BARKER VC, (via author 
Wayne Ralph at 
http://www.theaerodrome.com/forum/2001/11306-sopwith-camel-flight-characteristics.html 
):

Quote:

All the weight of the engine, guns, and pilot was concentrated in the first 
seven feet of a short 18-foot fuselage. The various models of rotary engine 
fitted to the Camel, from a 110-hp Le Rhone, to a 130-hp Clerget, to a 150-hp 
Bentley, had the propeller attached to the engine crankcase and the crankshaft 
to the aircraft so that the propeller and engine revolved together at more 
than 1250 rpm. This heavy whirling engine was lubricated continually by castor 
oil which was not recycled, but rather was burned in the combustion process 
and vented overboard, soaking the aircraft, the pilot's flying suit, helmet 
and goggles. The gyroscopic forces that were generated varied in intensity 
based on a complex interaction of engine rpm, aircraft speed, and control 
input. The scout had a different character turning left or right, as did all 
the rotary-engined aeroplanes, but the Camel to an extreme degree. It was 
sluggish in left turns and the nose always pitched up, while right turns were 
very quick, with the nose dropping sharply. Without plenty of top (ie, left) 
rudder to correct the pitch down, it would spin. A Camel pilot had to apply 
left rudder turning left or right, the amount varying with aircraft speed and 
engine rpm. Since the engine rotation countered the input of left stick and 
rudder, some pilots made all turns to the right because the aircraft was 
quicker through 270 degrees, than 90 degrees to the left. The Camel's elevator 
was powerful and sensitive, while the rudder was too small and relatively 
ineffective. Coordinated turns demanded a fine touch. Correcting sideslip, the 
tendency of the aeroplane to slide to the inside of a banked turn, by applying 
opposite rudder, caused the Camel to tighten up in the turn. In steep turns 
over 45 degrees of bank, the aircraft tended to pitch up its nose, and tighten 
up its bank angle as speed reduced, requiring continual adjustments in the 
amount of forward pressure on the stick with engine rpm changes. In the words 
of test pilot W/C Paul A. Hartman, RCAF, the Camel has no 'dynamic 
longitudinal stability' in steep turns. Accelerating the aircraft caused the 
nose to climb, and swing to the left. At 110 miles per hour, there was about 
15 to 20 pounds of back force on the control column, which could not be 
trimmed out because the aircraft had no pilot-adjustable, moveable horizontal 
stabilizer. Therefore, Camel pilots had to fly two-to-three hour missions, 
continually applying forward pressure just to maintain level flight. Letting 
go resulted in the aircraft pitching up, and rolling inverted to the right. 
Moving the stick forward to enter a dive caused the Camel to yaw left because 
of gyroscopic force, and correcting this yaw with right rudder caused the nose 
to pitch down sharply. By today's standards the Camel was completely 
unacceptable, and yet many pilots of 1917-8, most with under 100 hours of 
flying time used it as a lethal weapon.

---

http://www.theaerodrome.com/forum/2001/11306-sopwith-camel-flight-characteristics-3.html
In those notes are a description of when and why the mixture had to be adjusted. 
If memory serves, it was perilously low to the ground, under 250 feet. The 
shift to left rudder would have to have taken place either just before or just 
after this, because the whole point of changing the mixture was that the 
engine would have been on the verge of choking, which means that you'd be 
trying to maintain flying speed.

My guess is that the shift would have to happen within 10-20 seconds of 
getting airborne under normal circumstances.

---

"...all flights of these early machines were conducted from the grass surface 
of the airfield, not the paved runways, and the steerable tail skid of the 
Camel helped to overcome a slight swing to the left as I opened the throttle. 
The tail came up at about 20 knots.

As the speed reached 40 knots I eased the stick back slightly and the Camel 
became airborne. It accelerated rapidly to 55 knots and I held it in a climb 
at that speed until I reached 500 feet. I leveled off, leaned the mixture, and 
started a left hand turn. The gyroscopic effect from the rotary engine quickly 
became apparent...

...I enjoyed flying the Camel, but its vices of control instability, extreme 
control sensitivity and pronounced gyroscopic effects all combined to create 
the impression of balancing an egg on the point of a needle rather than flying 
an aircraft...it was never forced into manoeuvres - they were executed by 
light pressure on the controls and subsequently relaxing, or sometimes 
reversing, the pressure once the desired rate of response was attained.

By modern standards of stability and control, the Camel would be totally 
unacceptable as a military aircraft...

(quoted from Canada's National Aviation Museum - Its History and Collection, 
by K.M. Molson)

http://www.theaerodrome.com/forum/2001/11306-sopwith-camel-flight-characteristics.html

---

"As I opened the throttle I simultaneously applied full left rudder and as I 
became airborn I found that I had full left rudder on. (This was the answer 
always, as I afterwards found, and I was never in trouble again from this 
cause)"

August 98 issue of Flight journal has the flying of the Camel by Rich King. 
160 Hp Gnome engine (yes, rotary), quote:

Right rudder is needed to keep the Camel tracking straight ahead while it is 
on the runway, and as the tail comes up, I find that my rudder correction was 
right on. I m facing straight down the center of the runway.........A little 
back pressure on the control stick and the bumpy ground falls away behind me, 
and the Camels speed continues to increase at an exhilarating rate. A little 
forward pressure on the "closh handle" hold the aeroplane a few feet above the 
runway while its speed continues to increase. .... Left Rudder is now needed 
to keep the racing Camel straight....." end quote

http://www.theaerodrome.com/forum/2001/11306-sopwith-camel-flight-characteristics-2.html

---

From the Frank Tallman book "Flying the old planes"...

My Sopwith Camel is, as far as I'm aware, the only original World War 1 Camel 
ever brought back to flying condition. It was originally owned by Colonel 
Jarrett of the Jarrett War Museum located on the old Steel Pier in Atlantic 
City; who in the 1930's had the best museum of WWI equipment ever assembled, 
including the Belgian War Museum in Brussels. The Jarrett Museum fell on hard 
times following WWII and, with time and money on my side after my service 
period, and a lifelong ambition of owning a WWI aircraft, I purchased for a 
small sum (by today's standards) several antique aircraft including the Camel, 
a Nieuport 28, a Pfalz D.XII, a Fokker D.VII and a SPAD VII.

The Camel was the first WWI aircraft I brought back to flying condition and 
required some major rebuilding, which took several years, many thousands of 
dollars and a whole host of experts including Paul Poberzney of the 
Experimental Aircraft Association, the gifted master craftsman Ned Kensinger, 
the Hawker Siddeley Group and a number of very dedicated volunteer's.

(NB: There is quite a bit on the rebuilding process in the Chapter but I have 
left it out of this extract for the sake of space).

When the day finally came to fly the air was filled with great anticipation. 
On arrival at the airport though I was dismayed to hear from my team that they 
had been trying to get the temperamental 110 h.p. Le Rhone started since 
8.00am that morning, without success. The lack of knowledge amongst us 
regarding the Le Rhone was appalling. Did we have spark? Yes. Was the mag set? 
Yes. Had the commutator ring been wiped off? Yes. Had we primed it? Only every 
other cylinder.

With only a vague notion of what I was doing I clambered into the cockpit (a 
very tight fit) and reviewed the cord-wrapped Spade stick, the Block tube, 
carburettors next to one's knees, the flexible air intake to the outside air 
scoops, the wood wire brace longerons, the instrument panel with it's clutter 
and the duel control cables to the wooden rudder bar. At my request, the crew 
forced open the intake valves as the engine was pushed through (switch off) 
and shot a charge of fuel in each cylinder, as the cylinder came in front of 
the hole in the cowling. By accident, rather than by knowledge, I advanced the 
long lever controlling the air, and in pushing the manet (a small wheel knob 
on the miniature control quadrant) forward and then returning it, I had hit on 
the correct starting procedure. Wonder of wonders, as I flipped the 
porcelain-mounted switch up and called for contact, the Le Rhone started with 
a full-throated bellow, scaring both me and the crew!

By shoving the fuel-controlling lever forward and using the coupe (cut-out) 
button on the stick, I was able to keep the engine running. Soon the 
never-to-be-forgotten smell of castor oil infused our area, and the sight of 
oil splattering the leading edge of the low wings indicated that the engine 
was lubricating properly. Taxiing practice ended ignominiously a hundred feet 
from the starting point, when my newfound knowledge wasn't equal to the 
delicate adjustment of fuel and air, and the Le Rhone quit.

The revitalised ground crew hauled the 900 pound airplane over the grass and 
faced me into the wind. For safety sake we changed the plugs, and the Le Rhone 
started first try. I headed down the field with the throttle wide open. The 
tail came up almost instantly, and visibility was good, except for the Aldis 
sight and the twin Vickers. Not having planned on flight it came as something 
of a shock to find the Camel airborne at about 35 mph after a ground run of 
just 150 feet. Being afraid of jockeying with my ticklish fuel and air 
controls I stayed low and just got used to the Camel's sensitive ailerons, 
elevators and rudder.

I circled the field once, got into position for landing, shut fuel air and 
switch off, and made a light forward slip, touching down gently on three 
points. Total landing couldn't have been much longer than the initial take-off 
run.

So much for my first (unintentional) flight in the Camel.

Since then I've spent more time flying the Camel than any of the other 
historical aircraft in our collection. I've also had more forced landings in 
it than all the rest of the WWI aircraft combined. It's that temperamental Le 
Rhone. Cylinders have blown, magneto's have failed, even fouled spark plugs 
have brought me down unceremoniously, with sweating hands and my heart in my 
mouth, desperately seeking a patch of open ground on which to land. Yet for 
all that it's the one I turn to first for any show or exhibition, as the Camel 
gets my blood going like no other. This is an aircraft that is a joy to fly.

With the Le Rhone 9J, you cannot adjust either the fuel or air intake without 
running the risk of a dead-stick landing. You must leave them alone and use 
you Coupe (cut-out) button for all fight handling.

The take-off run is easy. In a wind of 10 to 15 knots you are airborne in a 
couple of plane lengths at 35 mph and climbing out at 60 mph, with a rate of 
climb of almost 1,000 feet a minute. The elevators are sensitive, as is the 
rudder. Consequently, when fling for any distance I often put the heels of my 
shoes on the floor tie wires, because the vibration of the Le Rhone through 
the rudder bar exaggerates the rudder movements.

In level flight at 100 mph indicated, the Camel is delightful, with just a 
hint of rudder being required for straight flight. The structure is rugged 
enough to feel comfortable in loops, and being slightly tail-heavy it goes up 
and over in an incredibly small circle in the sky, and faster than any other 
WWI aircraft I have flown. Sneeze and your halfway through a loop before your 
aware of what's happened. 110 mph is enough to carry you through, and as you 
slow down over the top you must feed in rudder against the torque.

In military shows I have ground strafed, and as soon as the airspeed reaches 
130 to 140 mph the nose begins to hunt up and down, and the elevator becomes 
extremely sensitive. I feel this action is due largely to the square 
windshield between the two Vickers guns, causing a substantial burble over the 
tail surfaces.

Turns are what the Camel is all about. Turning to the right with the torque 
requires the top rudder to hold the nose up, and the speed with which you can 
complete a 360-degree turn is breathtaking. Left turns are slower, with the 
nose wanting to rise during the turn. But small rudder input easily keeps the 
nose level with the horizon. In stalls at 35 to 40 mph the nose drops 
frighteningly fast and hard to the right, but you also get control back 
quickly, although a surprising amount of altitude has been lost. I have had 
the pleasure of limited dog fighting with other WWI fighters, and there are 
none that can stay with a Camel in a turn.

With the Le Rhone being temperamental as it is, flying the Camel is best done 
at times when there are few other aircraft in the sky, leaving easy access to 
the airport in cases of emergency. The Camel touches down easily but runs out 
of rudder control almost instantly, and if you bounce your landing at all, you 
are likely to find yourself in a hairy ground loop looking at a rapidly 
bending aileron dragging in the grass.

For a wide variety of reasons, the Camel is a fascinating airplane, 
flight-wise as well as historically. But don't think I ever got out of the 
Camel after being airborne even in the coldest weather without buckets of 
perspiration and considerable gratitude that I had gotten the little girl home 
again without breaking her into splinters!

http://www.theaerodrome.com/forum/aircraft/45869-sopwith-camel-myth-6.html

---

Additional comments on Camel handling characteristics by Victor Yeates, author 
of "Winged Victory" (yes, it's a fictional novel, but his experiences of 
flying a camel were realistic, and are a valid, honest description)...

Re training:

"Camels were wonderful fliers when you had got used to them, which took about 
three months of hard flying. At the end of that time you were either dead, a 
nervous wreck, or the hell of a pilot and a terror to Huns . . ."

Re turns:

"And in the more legitimate matter of vertical turns, nothing in the skies 
could follow in so tight a circle..."

Re the half-roll (Split S):

"The same with the half-roll. Nothing would half-roll like a Camel. A twitch 
of the stick and flick of the rudder and you were on your back. The nose 
dropped at once and you pulled out having made a complete reversal of 
direction in the least possible time.

Thomson, the squadron stunt expert told him that it (half-roll) was just the 
first half of a roll followed by the second half of a loop; the only stunt 
useful in fighting. If you were going the wrong way, it was the quickest known 
method of returning in your slipstream."

Re the loop (he didn't like looping a Camel):

"But a Camel had to be flown carefully round with exactly the right amount of 
left rudder, or else it would rear and buck and hang upside down and flop and 
spin."

Re general flight:

" . . . a Camel had to be held in flying position all the time, and was out of 
it in a flash. It was nose light, having a rotary engine weighing next to 
nothing per horse power, and was rigged tail heavy so that you had to be 
holding her down all the time. Take your hand off the stick and it would rear 
right up with a terrific jerk and stand on its tail."

Re ground strafing (which he hated due to ground anti-ac machine gun fire):

"Unfortunately, they were good machines for ground-strafing. They could dive 
straight down on anything, and when a few feet off the ground, go straight up 
again."

Re speed:"...a Camel was a wonderful machine in a scrap. If only it had been 
fifty per cent faster! There was the rub. A Camel could neither catch anything 
except by surprise, nor hurry away from an awkward situation, and seldom had 
the option of accepting or declining combat...You couldn't have everything."

http://www.theaerodrome.com/forum/aircraft/45869-sopwith-camel-myth-6.html

---

Australian ace Edgar McCloughry:

"I at once turned but they did not wait, one of the horrible characteristics 
of a camel being, as I will describe later, that it is unable to catch any 
other machine with the exception of the Fokker Triplane on the level."

"One word on the 'Camel': There is not one pilot in the squadron who would not 
argue to the end for a Camel. Although slow, she could get around anything, 
also one could not run away from anything, which rather aimed for success."

Arthur Cobby, another Australian ace:

"In this manner we accounted for a few of the enemy, but they could dive 
faster than our Camels. Unless we got close to them early in their dive, they 
would just keep on diving and so get away. ... If we were only able to 
encourage the enemy to get in a dogfight, things were easy, as a Camel could 
out maneuver anything."

Comments above are by Australian pilots who used the 130 HP Clerget model of 
the Camel; other squadrons used 140 HP engines; the 150 HP model was used by 
English squadrons at this time.

http://www.kuro5hin.org/story/2002/12/1/02631/3666

---

Like many other World War I airplanes, the Camel's vertical tail was too 
small. Any stall automatically became a snap roll spin entry, even without 
intentional rudder deflection. Finally, once spinning, the Camel required 
vigorous rudder defliction against the spin to stop the motion. A well-behaved 
airplane, on theother hand, has to be held in a spin; letting the controls go 
free should result in automatic recovery. 


http://assets.cambridge.org/97805218/09924/sample/9780521809924ws.pdf
---

Indeed you are correct about the Rudder - it's area was a paltry 4.9 sq. ft. 
(and fin at 3 sq. ft.) 

http://www.theaerodrome.com/forum/aircraft/47951-sopwith-camel-myth-2-a.html


----

The pathetically small fixed area on the fin/rudder made the problems in yaw 
even worse. A pilot generally doesn't hold the rudder pedals stiffly enough 
for the rudder to contribute very much to yaw stability.

http://www.djaerotech.com/dj_askjd/dj_questions/short_coupled.html

---

Replica Camel with rotary engine:

The first flights on the plane proved to be very impressive with performance figures very close to the original aircraft, stall speed is below 40 mph, cruise comes in at 80 mph and climb is a conservative 1000 feet per minute. 

http://www.lightsportaircraftpilot.com/airventure2010/2.html
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Airdrome_Sopwith_Camel

---

Arthur Cobby:

We had not come into contact with it [Fokker DVII] to any extent as most of our 
patrol work was being done at lower altitude, but our fellow Australians in No.2 
[No.2 Sqn Australian Flying Corps] were continually meeting them. Their SE5a's 
could get to greater heights than our Camels, which were at their best up to 
about 12,000 ft. We could get much higher of course, but the performance fell 
off rapidly above this level, and against the new Fokker, would put up an 
indifferent show. Later on we did meet them up higher and managed by sheer hard 
flying to hold our own, but unless one was an exceptional good pilot the odds 
were definitely not good.

---

Speed:

The trials for the Sopwith Camel was done with an 150 hp Bentley of which only 
the Royal Naval Air Service squadrons were equipped. The RAF, AFC and USAS 
squadrons equipped with the Sopwith Camel had 130 or 140 hp Clergets. The 
Bentley trials gave the Camel a top speed of 114 mph at 15,000 feet while the 
Snipe at the same height had a speed of 113 mph. However this statistic is 
meaningless as the Sopwith Camel was obsolete in comparison to the Fokker DVII 
above 12,000 feet.

http://www.southsearepublic.org/article/1501/read/
---

Gyroscopic effect:

In the case of the Camel, with approximately 400 pounds of gyroscope hanging 
on the nose, a turn to the left would cause a gyroscopic precession moment 
that would try to raise the nose. A turn to the right would shove the nose 
down. In a right turn this acts like down elevator. If you roll into a steep 
bank and shove in enough down, you will find yourself in knife-edge flight 
with no turn rate. OTOH, for a steep turn you normally need a pretty fair dose 
of "up", and the precession in a left turn would provide essentially the same 
thing. Pulling the nose up would cause a yaw to the right, and pushing the 
nose down would yaw the airplane to the left. If you stall, the rapid 
pitch-down at the stall break would cause a strong and rapid yaw to the left, 
just as if you had just stomped on the left rudder. And we all know what 
happens when you boot the rudder right at the stall break.

http://www.djaerotech.com/dj_askjd/dj_questions/short_coupled.html

---



Cause of take-off crashes:

You take off, start a normal climb (nose well up, airspeed low, power at max), 
and just as you start into that standard 90 degree left turn after takeoff, 
the engine begins to sputter, instantly drawing your attention away from the 
horizon and into the cockpit. Meanwhile, unbeknownst to the pilot (whose head 
is in the cockpit, and who has never experienced a plane that automatically 
tries to change its pitch attitude dramatically whenever it turns) the left 
turn plus the gyroscopic effects starts inexorably pulling the nose up. The 
airplane's nearly non-existent pitch stability (due to the aft C/G) doesn't 
put up much resistance to this. The more nose-up attitude adds to the already 
decaying airspeed (caused by the loss of power from the sputtering engine), 
and sure enough, the airflow lets go from those thin wings and the plane 
stalls violently. The pilot, suddenly attentive but completely disoriented, 
looks up (far too late to do anything about the situation) just in time to see 
the nose yaw violently to the left as it falls through in the stall break. In 
this era long before the relationship between stall, angle of attack and 
airspeed was properly understood, our neophite pilot reacts (naturally) by 
pulling the stick back the rest of the way, and probably adding full right 
aileron as well. With utterly no chance for a recovery at this point, the 
airplane does about a quarter turn before smiting itself against terra-firma. 
The rotation is slight enough that his buddies on the ground don't recognize 
that it was indeed a spin, perpetuating the mystery and the myth, and delaying 
any meaningful insight into solving the problem. Today, however, we can 
recognize from the photos that it was indeed a spin that added our hapless 
hero to the Camel's list of statistics. Clearly visible in the photo is that 
fact that one set of wings are wrapped around the nose, and the other set are 
wrapped around the tail, indicating that the plane was rotating when it hit.

http://www.djaerotech.com/dj_askjd/dj_questions/short_coupled.html

---

Camel Spinning, Camel Gyroscopic couple & rudder effectiveness compared to the 
SE5a

From: British Aviation, The Great War and Armistice 1915-1918 by Harold 
Penrose. page 376

Even more worrying were Camel crashes through spinning, for the S.E.5a was 
comparatively immune when flown under similar circumstances. Camels were 
usually rigged tail-heavy with full tank and were then longi­tudinally 
unstable like the D.H.6. This was accentuated when the lighter Le Rhone was 
substituted for a Clerget, or guns and ammunition were removed. Usually a 
continuous forward pressure of some 14 lb was re­quired on the control column 
when in normal horizontal flight; any relaxation ended in a stall, and so did 
engine failure unless the pilot instantly dived the machine.

In the course of evidence on the machine's behaviour, most pilots drew 
attention to the necessity of applying full left rudder in a steeply banked 
right-hand turn. Torque and slipstream pro­duced unsymmetrical settings of 
aileron and rudder, but not effects dependent on rate of turn to any great 
extent, the gyroscopic couple alone being capable of that. Propeller and 
engine revolved clockwise, viewed from the pilot's seat, so when the aeroplane 
was turning right the gyro­scopic couple put the nose down, countered by top, 
that is left, rudder and back elevator.

Analysis showed that the effective couple produced by a given setting of the 
rudder on a Camel was 40 per cent less than for the S.E.5a, whereas the 
gyroscopic couple to be counteracted was more than twice as great. To make the 
two machines equally effective would necessi­tate doubling the Camel's rudder 
area.

It was immediately evident with a Camel that violent use of elevator must be 
avoided, for when the stick was pulled back too hard the machine would not 
complete a loop. By contrast, full left rudder could scarcely keep a loop 
straight, but surprisingly when it came to spinning, the rudder was relatively 
unimportant. As soon as the stick was pulled hard back and the machine stalled 
fully it would flick into a spin, but quickly stopped if the column was eased 
slightly forward with other controls neutral, and could be stopped almost 
instantly by reversing the rudder as well as giving forward stick -though this 
induced a violent manoeuvre, and lack of skill could result in the machine 
entering a reverse spin. If the pilot became dizzy the Camel would not come 
out of a spin with controls free, and only slowly ifall controls were held 
central. That forward push on the stick was essential.

---

Flight International 2 May 1968, By RONALD SYKES, DFC

"Pull up into a stall and apply the usual encouragement from the rudder; the 
Camel will then cartwheel over and then flick into a spin (which, with the 
stick held right back, will be a fast one). Centralize the controls and after 
about four more turns the machine will come out of the spin: it can be forced 
out more quickly, by applying opposite rudder and pushing the stick forward 
briskly, though this does not always have the desired result."

---

JSBSIM & THE DIRECTION OF THE GYROSCOPIC EFFECT

JSBSim seems to have the direction of force for the moment of inertia of the 
gyroscopic effect of the engine reversed. This creates a difficult problem for 
modelling the Camel, because the gyroscopic effect of the Camel is so 
pronounced. Below are my notes on the problem and now it was resolved in the 
Camel JSBSim flight modle:

  The docs say that sense =1 for CW propeller as seen
  from the cockpit.  The camel has a CW propeller by every example
  I've been able to find. This source definitely says, "The 
  direction of rotation was counter-clockwise as seen from the 
  propeller-end of the engine." The photos also show a CCW (from 
  propeller-end) rotating prop.  That would be clockwise as seen 
  from the pilot's seat and sense=1. 
  http://www.gracesguide.co.uk/Clerget
   
  But sense=1 makes the Camel climb on RH 
  turn and dive on LH turn.  Lots of sources say the opposite,
  especially including this experienced pilot who is clearly 
  flying a craft with a CW propeller (as seen from cockpit) and 
  yet he says the Camel dives on RH turn and climbs on LH.
  
    http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=j6PnKUEFX8g
  
  Wikipedia says, "To easily ascertain the direction of gyro effect, simply 
  remember that a rolling wheel tends, when it leans to the side, to turn in the 
  direction of the lean." http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gyroscope#Properties That 
  means, for a CW (from the rear) propeller, a turn to the right causes nose to 
  drop, exactly what is reported for the Camel. 

  My conclusion is that JSBSim has it backwards and sense=1 corresponds to CCW 
  rotation of the prop, as seen from the rear, as far as gyroscopic moment is 
  concerned.
  
  However, as far as p_factor & torque is concerned, JSBSim seems to have it 
  right.
  
  So what we're going to do is put in sense=1 here to get correct p_factor and 
  torque effects, but then put in a correction down in the aero section to 
  correct the moments, which JSBSim seems to have reversed.

THICK VS THIN AIRFOILS; DRAG AND LIFT

Thick airfoils had a great advantage besides the structural one. Compared with 
thin wings, thick wings could produce more lift, by about 25 percent, because 
the gentle roundness of the leading edges helped air follow the curvature of 
the airfoil and not break away. The added lift did not affect climb rate, but 
it improved maneuverability, because the space within which an airplane can 
turn is determined by its maximum lift.

Triplanes could also fly in a very nose-high attitude, because the thick wing 
kept producing lift at angles at which the sharp-edged wings of Allied 
fighters had already given up. A U.S. pilot, James Hall, wrote of the Fokkers’ 
“trick of standing on their tails beneath one” with guns firing upward.

http://www.airspacemag.com/history-of-flight/red_baron.html?c=y&page=2

---

                
ROTARY ENGINE CONTROLS

It is often asserted that rotary engines had no carburettor and hence power 
could only be reduced by intermittently cutting the ignition using a "blip" 
switch, which grounded the magneto when pressed, shutting off power to the 
spark plugs and stopping ignition. However, rotaries did have a simple 
carburettor which combined a gasoline jet and a flap valve for throtting the 
air supply. Unlike modern carburettors, it could not keep the fuel/air ratio 
constant over a range of throttle openings; in use, a pilot would set the 
throttle to the desired setting (usually full open) then adjust the fuel/air 
mixture to suit using a separate "fine adjustment" lever that controlled the 
fuel valve.

Due to the Gnôme's large inertia, it was possible to adjust the appropriate 
fuel/air mixture by trial and error without stalling it. After starting the 
engine with a known setting that allowed it to idle, the air valve was opened 
until maximum engine speed was obtained. Since the reverse process was 
difficult, "throttling" was accomplished by temporarily cutting the ignition 
using the blip switch.

By the middle stages of World War I some throttling capability was found 
necessary to allow pilots to fly in formation, and the improved carburettors 
which entered use allowed a power reduction of up to 25%. The pilot would 
close off the air valve to the required position, then re-adjust the fuel/air 
mixture to suit. Experienced pilots would gently back off the fuel lever at 
frequent intervals to make sure that the mixture was not too rich: a too-lean 
mixture was preferable, since power recovery would be instant when the fuel 
supply was increased, whereas a too-rich mixture could take up to 7 seconds to 
recover and could also cause fouling of spark plugs and the cylinders to cut 
out.

The Gnôme Monosoupape was an exception to this, since most of its air supply 
was taken in through the exhaust valve, and so could not be controlled via the 
crankcase intake. Monosoupapes therefore had a single petrol regulating 
control used for a limited degree of speed regulation. Early models also 
featured variable valve timing to give greater control, but this caused the 
valves to burn and therefore it was abandoned.

Later rotaries still used blipping the ignition for landing, and some engines 
were equipped with a switch that cut out only some rather than all of the 
cylinders to ensure that the engine kept running and did not oil up. A few 9 
cylinder rotaries had this capability, typically allowing 1, 3, or 6 cylinders 
to be kept running. Some 9 cylinder Monosoupapes had a selector switch which 
allowed the pilot to cut out six cylinders so that each cylinder fired only 
once per three engine revolutions but the engine remained in perfect balance. 
Some documentation regarding the Fokker Eindecker shows a rotary selector 
switch to cut out a selected number of cylinders suggesting that German 
rotaries did as well.

By 1918 a Clerget handbook advised that all necessary control was to be 
effected using the throttle, and the engine was to be stopped and started by 
turning the fuel on and off. Pilots were advised to avoid use of the cut out 
switch as it would eventually damage the engine.

The blip switch is, however, still recommended for use during landing 
rotary-engined aircraft in modern times as it allows pilots a more reliable, 
quick source of power that lends itself to modern airfields. The landing 
procedure using a blip switch involved shutting off the fuel using the fuel 
lever, while leaving the blip switch on. The windmilling propeller allowed the 
engine to continue to spin without delivering any power as the aircraft 
descended. It was important to leave the blip switch on while the fuel was 
shut off to allow the spark plugs to continue to spark and keep them from 
oiling up, while the engine could easily be restarted simply by re-opening the 
fuel valve. If a pilot shut the engine off by holding the blip switch down 
without cutting off the fuel, fuel would continue to pass through the engine 
without combusting and raw fuel/air mix would collect in the cowling. This 
could cause a serious fire when the switch was released, or alternatively 
could cause the spark plugs to oil up and prevent the engine restarting. 

Source: http://www.sim-outhouse.com/sohforums/showthread.php?6993-Rotary-Engines

---

The early Gnome 50-80 hp 7 cylinder rotary aero engines introduced from 1908 
onwards had no throttle control, and the fuel/air mixture could only be 
adjusted for fine tuning on the ground by a mechanic. The engine was therefore 
either on or off, although there was a blip-switch for the pilot to 
temporarily cut ignition. The development of the 100hp Gnome Monosoupape (or 
'Mono') in 1913 introduced pilot-control of the fuel-air mixture for the first 
time, with a lever that regulated petrol flow to the engine. This permitted 
the pilot to make small adjustments to the RPM, or lean the fuel mixture at 
higher altitudes to maintain engine efficiency. Lt. R.T. Leighton provides a 
very good description of this in his pilot notes published by the Shuttleworth 
Collection: "The engine should give 1,150-1,200 rpm, as height is gained, then 
petrol should be cut down until engine is giving 1,050-1,100 rpm, when machine 
[Avro 505K] flies level at 65 mph. The machine at full revs flies level at 85 
mph...[to descend] shut petrol off...glide down at 55 mph...do not 'buzz' 
engine...taxi in by buzzing the engine with petrol about 1" on adjustment". 
Pilots were now discouraged from using the blip-switch, as over-use could 
stress the engine and (in the mono) cause an engine fire. In the 100hp 
Monosoupape the engine rpm could only be reduced by about 10% or 20% without 
risking engine cut-out. In 1916 the 160 hp 14 cylinder version of the Gnome 
Monosoupape introduced another refinement in the form of a second magneto 
switch that could be used to cut ignition temporarily to two or more of the 14 
cylinders in any one cycle to give reduced power rather than no power at all: 
a switch that could be used to reduce engine output by approximately 1/8, 1/4 
or 1/2.

The Le Rhone and Clerget engines introduced a second mixture control, to 
control the air added to the mixture (often referred to as the 'throttle' by 
WWI pilots) although the petrol adjustment lever was also retained (referred 
to under a number of different names, but most usualy as the 'fine adjustment' 
by RFC pilots). There has been quite a bit written on the Le Rhone, which was 
much liked by pilots. Cecil Lewis, in 'Sagittarius rising' comments "The 
rotary was an 80hp Le Rhone. It was a beauty, the sweetest running rotary ever 
built. It throttled down and ticked over like a water-cooled stationary, and 
was as smooth as silk over its whole range". The Le Rhone was also ahead of 
its time in linking the throttle to the needle valve which regulated the 
petrol supply: Lt. Leighton comments in his pilots notes that "Theoretically, 
the position of the fine adjustment can be found once and for all for every 
position of the throttle, so that having set fine adjustment once, it need not 
be moved again. The throttle lever then being worked as on a stationary 
engine". He adds, though, that "Practically, the engine will run if worked 
this way, but better results are obtained by varying the position of the fine 
adjustment with varying positions of the throttle lever". The two levers were 
positioned together normally on the left of the cockpit, on a quadrant marked 
from 1-10.

The Clerget had the same arrangement of throttle and fine adjustment levers, 
but dispensed with the unreliable linkage between the two - it was much liked 
by ack emmas, as it was easier than the Le Rhone to maintain in the field, and 
by the War Department as it was slightly cheaper than the Le Rhone. In both 
the Le Rhone and the Clerget (and the later Bentley) the combination of a 
throttle and a fine adjustment did take some getting used to, and RPM could 
not be changed rapidly in flight even by experienced pilots. I do not believe 
the 'throttle' was used much, if at all, in combat - it was used mainly to 
ensure optimum endurance at altitude, to make formation flying easier, and to 
reduce power on landing. Engine rpm could not, in practice, be reduced below 
50% or so of engine power, however, so a powered landing would still require 
use of the blip switch unless the pilot was confident enough to bring the 
airoplane in by gliding down with the petrol switched off. Robert W. Bradford 
(An Associate Director of the [Canadian?] National Aviation Museum) is quoted 
as saying "the 110/120 hp Le Rhone rotary has the characteristics of all early 
rotary engines - they have a high idling speed in proportion to the full power 
rpm. They simply do not 'tick over' as a radial or inline engine would do - in 
fact with the fixed pitch wooden propeller, they idle at about 45% of full 
engine speed (500 rpm as against 1150 rpm for take-off at full power)" 
[billybishop.net/bishopF.html]. I have seen a variety of other figures for the 
safe idling speed of Le Rhones and Clergets, from 600 rpm up to 800 rpm, and 
there is some evidence that the Bentley rotaries might have idled at a lower 
rpm [Blakemore,1986] - in practice, I suspect each engine would be slightly 
different depending on the make, length of service or time between overhauls, 
the skill of the fitter, maintenance standards in the field, etc. It does seem 
clear, however, that most pilots would be reluctant to risk an engine cut-out 
(particularly in the final approach to landing) by cutting rpm back further 
than 50% of engine speed.

So these rotary engines could be 'throttled' up or down, but it was certainly 
not a simple procedure and pilots report that it took considerable practice 
before it became second nature (engine failure on take-off was often caused by 
the pilot getting the mixture wrong and then choking the engine). Also, these 
engines could not be 'throttled' up or down quickly - it took about 7 seconds 
before the change in the mixture setting had any effect on engine power [Nahum,
 1987]. Using such a 'throttle' in combat was therefore unlikely to be 
practicable. Most pilots would continue to use the blip-switch to produce 
sudden changes in engine power, mostly on the final approach to landing 
(although they were officially discouraged from doing so, particularloy at 
full engine power, as it damaged the engine).

German rotaries were similar to the early Gnome and Le Rhone engines, although 
German pilots had both throttle and mixture control for even those engines 
based on the early Gnome design (so the Fokker E.III/E.IV had both a throttle 
and a mixture lever). I think that the most interesting of the German rotaries 
is the late war contra-rotating 160hp SH III fitted to the Siemens Schuckert 
DIII and IV. This was "fitted with twin magnetos and speed was governed by a 
proper throttle control, sensitive down to about 350 rpm" [Profile 86].

Blakemore, L N. Bentley BR2 World War 1 rotary aero engine: building the one 
quarter scale working replica. Yalanga, 1986.

Leighton, R T. Pilots' notes for the handling of World War I warplanes and 
their rotary engines. Shuttleworth Collection. [Pamphlet. Notes originally 
written in 1917 by an RFC pilot. Covers the Monosoupape, Clerget and Le Rhone 
rotaries, with notes on flying Avro, 1 1/2 Strutter and Pup].

Morse, William. Rotary engines of World War One. Nelson and Saunders, 1987

Nahum, Andrew. The rotary aero engine. HMSO, 1987.

Profile Publication 86: The Siemens Schuckert DIII and IV. 1966.

Lewis, Cecil. Sagittarius rising. Peter Davies, 1966.

http://www.theaerodrome.com/forum/ai...-1-allied.html

http://www.theaerodrome.com/forum/ai...-2-german.html

Source: http://www.sim-outhouse.com/sohforums/showthread.php?6993-Rotary-Engines

---

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The enclosed Sopwith Camel JSBSim flight model started as an 
Aeromatic-generated model and was then heavily modified based on ideas from 
the FlightGear and JSBSim forums, wiki, documentation, and other JSBSim models.

In particular, the P-51D JSBSim FDM by Aeromatic, Jon Berndt, DATCOM, and 
modified extensively by Hal V. Engel provided a model of a JSBSim FDM that 
successful modeled asymmetric stall, snap rolls, induction of a spin during 
stall, and other characteristics found in the Camel FDM.

Other than the JSBSim FDM, adaption of weapons models for the Camel, and other 
minor adaption as needed for these updated systems, the Camel models, sounds, 
systems, and XML files are all the versions distributed with FlightGear, which 
credits AJ MacLeod, Vivian Meazza.

LICENSE, COPYING
FlightGear is released under the GNU GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE and this JSBSim 
FDM and all associated files are released under the same license.