WHAT'S NEW WITH BOMBABLE
(for FlightGear ver 1.9.0, 1.9.1, 2.0, 2.4.0, 2.6.0, 2.8.0, 2.10.0, 2.12.0, 2.12.1)

Brent Hugh, brent@brenthugh.com
Available at http://brenthugh.com/flightgear/bombable4-5b.zip

4.5b
------------------------
 * AIRCRAFT UPDATE: Includes Historically Accurate JSBSim Sopwith Camel 
ver 1.6.  The new JSBSim Camel, ver. 1.5, was Aircraft of the Month for May 
2013.  Ver. 1.6 of the JSBSim Camel FDM is improved a great deal thanks to 
feedback received from users during that month.

  - Both the 1.5 and 1.6 versions of the Camel are included in this package. 
    Version 1.5 is more conventional while Version 1.6 is more historically 
    accurate and quirky.
 
  - Version 1.6 is identified as "sopwithCamel-Bombable16".  To fly the 
    historically accurate flight dynamics model, choose the JSBSim version.  
    You will find it quite difficult to control and to fly, with many quirks--
    just as the real, historical Camel.
  
  - The YASim version is included as well (both in versions 1.5 and 1.6).  
    The YASim flight dynamics model for the Camel is more 'plain vanilla' and 
    flies much like a modern aircraft.  It is much easier to fly--definitely 
    lacking many of the well documented historical quirks of the real Camel.
  
  - Read much more about thie historically accurate JSBSim Camel project in 
    your Flightgear Aircraft directory: \Aircraft\sopwithCamel-Bombable\Docs  
   
 * FLIGHTGEAR 2.12 COMPATIBILITY: Bombable is compatible with FG 2.12.x 
with only minor adaptations--see below.

 * FLIGHTGEAR AI SCENARIOS, MAJOR UPDATE: A major change in Flightgear 2.12 
affects Bombable AI scenarios. On Flightgear reset (file/reset in the menu or 
shift-esc), Flightgear does not re-load any AI scenario you loaded when first 
starting Flightgear.  So if you start Flightgear with a Bombable AI scenario, 
then crash before completing it and reset, your scenario just disappears when
you reset. 

This is easily remedied:  After the re-set, just go to AI/Traffic and Scenario 
Settings and select the scenario that you wish to use.  You can choose the 
scenario(s) that you used when you originally started FG -OR- any other 
scenario you would like to use.

This is part of work by Flightgear developers to improve Flightgear 
usability--now you can start, stop, or change an AI scenario using the menu. 
You don't need to quit a re-start Flightgear

 * BOMBABLE IMPROVEMENT, SCENARIO RESPAWNING: Re-spawn any scenario close to 
you--either re-grouping the scenario aircraft and vehicles near you (with 
aircraft at your current altitude) -OR- preserve their current relative 
positions and altitudes.

This new/updated feature is in the Bombable/Options menu.

Together with Flightgear's updated 'live' AI Scenario system, this means 
you can have ANY of the Bombable scenarios active in ANY location instantly, 
and switch from any location and any scenario to any other instantly without 
re-starting Flightgear.  Here is how:

 - Go to AI/Traffic and select or de-select whichever scenarios you wish to 
   use.  All scenarios with prefix "Bomb-" are designed to work with Bombable.
 
 - Go to Bombable/Bombable Options and click one of the "Respawn" buttons--
   you have several different options to bring the scenario close to your
   current location.
 
 - If you choose the 'preserving relative position' options the scenarios 
   will be brought to your location while preserving the relative position and 
   altitudes of scenario aircraft.  For instance, the B17 Bombers with F6F 
   Hellcat Cover scenario will move the B17 bombers in their original formation 
   and the F6F Hellcats in their original formation several thousand feet higher
  
  - To check that scenarios were moved to your location properly, select 
    "Equipment/Map" and on the map click checkbox 'Traffic'.
  
 * UPDATE: Updates/improvements to acrobatic maneuvering of aircraft.
 
 * IMPROVEMENT: Improvements to flight modelling of AI aircraft so that they 
more closely match the maneuverability and speed of the corresponding 
Flightgear aircraft when climbing, diving, turning, etc.
  
 * BUGS: Numerous minor bugfixes and improvements.     

 
4.5
------------------------
Bombable is now compatible with FG 2.10 (as well as 2.8, 2.6 
and earlier versions) and includes a new, far more realistic
and true-to-life JSBSim flight model for the Sopwith Camel.

* The new JSBSim version of Sopwith Camel is far more realistic
as a fighter aircraft, implementing nearly every documented
flight characteristic of the original Camel.  The new JSBSim
Camel is very quirky and difficult to fly--just as the original
Camel was.  See separate file documenting the JSBSim flight 
model.  To try the new Camel flight model, in FGRun select:

 - sopwithCamel-Bombable
   - Sopwith Camel 1F.1 (JSBSim, Experimental, Guns/Bombable)
    
Improvements to make Bombable more compatible with FG 2.10 (as
well as 2.6 and 2.8):

* Continue to refined workaround for the FG bug allowing only one 
particlesystem per XML file.  Huge thanks and shout-out to Bombable
user Voudoun da Vinci for tracking down this error and the solution.
 
* Workarounds for a stricter XML parser that was adopted by 
FG somewhere between FG 2.4 and 2.10.  Several of the aircraft
XML files would not parse due to the special or foreign characters
included in comments.  

* Updated sound files to mono format (required by FG 2.10 3-D sound
system).

* Minor updates/bugfixes to aircraft, scenarios

4.4zf
------------------------
This version has only one change above ver 4.4, to make the 
Bombable release compatible with FG 2.8.0.  Files in 
AI/Aircraft/Fire-Particles have been reconfigured to be 
compatible with FG 2.8.0.

Huge thanks to FG and Bombable user Voudoun da Vinci for tracking
down the cause of this problem and for working out and sharing
the solution--included in this latest release. 

4.4 
------------------------
Version 4.4 is a complete revamping of Bombable into more of a 
complete, cohesive system for Multiplayer and AI dogfighting 
and bombing. The accuracy of all the basic functions has been
improved and made more realistic, and a number of new "Bombable-
compatible" aircraft have been included, from WWI fighters to
modern-day jet fighters.

* AI AIRCRAFT SHOOT AT YOU (VISUALLY): AI aircraft have been able to shoot
at you for a few versions, but now there is a visual indication--
projectiles coming at you, and sometimes from several different 
places on one ship or bomber.

* MULTIPLAYER AIRCRAFT SHOOT AT YOU (VISUALLY): Until now, Multiplayer
aircraft simply reported their damage to you via a popup message.
With Bombable 4.4, you can see the Multiplayer aircraft firing
its weapons at you, whenever the remote pilot is pulling the trigger. 

* WEAPON HIT DETECTION GREATLY IMPROVED: Complete re-vamped system 
for detecting your weapon hits on AI or Multiplayeraircraft. It is 
no longer limited by FG's built-in, large "damage cylinder". It now 
extends the weapon's flight path within that cylinder to determine 
precisely how close the weapon hit on your target--allowing much 
better modeling of hits, damage, and results.

* RELOCATE ANY SCENARIO TO YOUR LOCATION: Have an AI scenario based 
in San Francisco, but want to fly in London?  No problem, just hit a 
button in the Bombable menu and your scenario comes to you, wherever 
you are. Damage levels for AI aircraft and objects are re-set.  It's 
like loading a new scenario without having to re-start FlightGear.

* RE-SPAWN AI AIRCRAFT & OBJECTS: After you have shot down (or 
been shot down by!) AI aircraft or objects in scenarios, you can 
instantly re-spawn them and try again. (Available in the Bombable menu.)

* DAMAGE ANALYSIS SYSTEM GREATLY IMPROVED: In addition, the damage 
analysis system, which calculates how much damage your hit has done
to the other aircraft or object has been updated to calculate and 
use the momentum of weapons as the basis for determing damage of 
weapon hits. This has proven to be far more realistic and gives 
much better results than the previous ad-hoc method.

* GREATLY IMPROVED DAMAGE IMPACT VISUALS: Previous versions of
Bombable relied on FG's built-in impact animations.  The result was that
FG often showed the damage impact explosion when the projectile had
actually made a clean miss of the aircraft.  In Bombable 4.4, this problem is
solved, with impact explosions being shown exactly where Bombable calculates
they happen, and only when Bombable detects an actual hit with damage. 
So you have much tigher correspondence between what you see and what 
damage is recorded.

The impact animations work for all types of small and large caliber guns and 
bombs. The system uses FG's excellent particle system to draw the gun and bomb 
impacts with almost not impact on framerate, and far less jerkiness than FG's 
usual submodel method. As a bonus, the new animations look much, much better 
as well, and the visual of the impact matches the actual damage of the impact 
quite well--that is, the visual size of a bomb explosion closely matches the 
actual damage area of the bomb; small caliber weapons hits show as smaller 
impacts that large caliber weapons, etc.

* BLOW UP THE WORLD: If you drop a bomb on a scenery or a building--or, more 
properly, an officially designated bombing range--you see an explosion and a 
long-lasting fire, just as you do when you bomb a jeep, tank, or airplane.  
Previously, the bombs, guns, rockets, and other armament only had an effect on 
AI and MP aircraft, tanks, ships, and so on.  Now armament hits affect almost 
everything in the FlightGear world.

* AI AIRCRAFT MOVE VERTICALLY--AND DO LOOPS: AI aircraft now move much more 
realistically in the vertical direction.  They do loops, dive, and all the 
rest. Their behavior (climb rates, dive rates, and so on) matches those of 
the corresponding FG aircraft.  This makes for a much more realistic 3-D 
dogfighting experience in FlightGear.

* AI AIRCRAFT HAVE LIMITED AMMO AND FUEL: In FlightGear, YOU have limited ammo 
and fuel. Now the AI aircraft do, too. If they run low on ammo or fuel they 
will retire from the combat area and won't attack you unless you attack them. 
Once they leave the combat area they will refuel and re-load their ammo and 
you can re-engage them if you like. Or they may re-engage you. This makes 
combat much more realistic--when you run low on ammo you can disengage, land, 
and re-load your ammo as the AI aircraft are doing the same. Then take off and 
re-engage. You may come across enemy aircraft that are low on fuel or out of
ammunition.  You can devise strategies to take advantage of the enemy fighters
when they are low on fuel or ammo.

* REPORTS AND STATISTICS: How many hits, how much damage--look in the Bombable 
menu for Bombable Statistics.

* YOUR OWN WEAPONS CAN DAMAGE YOU: Drop a bomb on your own aircraft or too 
near it? You'll see the results--damage to your aircraft.  This makes bombing 
runs far more realistic--if you get too close to the bomb impact, you'll feel 
the results.

* REALISTIC ROLL RATES FOR AI AIRCRAFT: Roll rates are one the most 
important factors determining the effectiveness of fighter aircraft--
aircraft that can roll faster can turn faster.  Now the roll rate for
AI aircraft in scenarios can be customized, and bugs in the roll & turn
routines for AI aircraft have been fixed.

* SIGNIFICANT PERFORMANCE IMPROVEMENTS: Bombable now makes much less of 
an impact on your framerate, and much less stuttering & slowdown at
key points, like when numerous machine gun rounds are impacting.

* BOMBABLE GRUMMAN F6F HELLCAT ADDED: Added a new Bombable-compatible 
aircraft, the Grumman F6F Hellcat. This makes a great foil to the 
A6M2 Zero, as they fought against each other in WWII. (As always, 
mucho thanks must go to the authors of the F6F aircraft--all I've 
done is update the weaponry to be historically accurate and add a 
thin veneer of tweaks to make the aircraft completely compatible with 
Bombable. All credit for aircraft design, systems, FDM, and 
everything else goes to the original authors, in this case Emanuel 
Baranger and others.)

* BOMBABLE FOKKER DR.1 FIXED AND WORKS WELL WITH BOMBABLE: Fixed/update 
the Fokker Dr.1 aircraft. It is now the same aircraft as distributed 
in FG 2.4.0 but with added historically accurate guns and an aircraft 
help file.

* BOMBABLE SOPWITH CAMEL IMPROVED/MORE REALISTIC: The flyable Sopwith Camel
YASim settings have been updated to more closely reflect the performance
capabilities of a real Sopwith Camel aircraft, particularly the maximum speed,
which had been almost 20 knots slower in FG than in real life.  The attributes
of the AI version of the Camel, SPAD VII, and Fokker DR.1 were also updated
so that all very closely match historical performance data for the aircraft and
all can be flown against each other on comparable terms (ie, fly the Camel vs 
the Fokker or SPAD over Multiplayer; fly the Camel, Fokker, or SPAD against the
AI scenarios involving the Camel, Fokker, and SPAD, while maintaining good 
realism)

* BOMBABLE A-10 WARTHOG IMPROVED: The YASim file for the A-10 Warthog has been
tweaked to make the aircraft more precisely match the perform of the real
A-10 and to make it handle better a lower speeds (one of the main 
characteristics of the real A-10).  Still, if you're dogfighting with the A-10
you'll likely want to jettison all the bombs and a lighten the fuel load as 
well . . .

* NEW SCENARIOs: New scenarios to show off the F6F, one to show off
the Bombable UFO, and one to help with testing: 

 BOMB-LakeTahoeWWIIB17BombersWithF6FCover.xml
 BOMB-WWIIB17BombersWithF6FHellcatCover.xml 
 BOMB-MarinCountyUFOInvasion.xml
 BOMB-Kansas-City-Bombable-Testbed.xml
 BOMB-LakeTahoe-TwoF6FHellcats.xml
 BOMB-MarinCounty-TwoZeros.xml
 
With the new "Re-spawn AI objects" capability, the scenarios with just a few 
aircraft, such as two F6F Hellcats, two Zeros, and the 'simple' Camel 
invasions (with only three aircraft in each) work very well. You can fly 
against just a few opponents, without being overwhelmed by huge numbers of 
opponents as in some of the larger scenarios, and then re-spawn them as 
necessary.  

* BOMBABLE A-10 WARTHOG ADDED: The A-10 is the best plane to fly several
scenarios and including it in the package means that it can be 
used to fly multiplayer bombable as well.  It has several tweaks making
it easier to use with the Bombable package and also improves an annoying bug
where the A-10 slows FG's framerate massively after a few re-init/re-locates.
(Again, all credit to the A-10 original authors--all I have done is add
a few Bombable tweaks and specifics.)

* BOMBABLE UFO ADDED: This is mostly for testing; keys 1-9, 0, q, and w 
fire different weapons.  A working AI version is included--so you can
have dueling Bombable UFOs over Multiplayer or try the UFO dogfighting 
scenario (surprisingly fun!).  Also a testbed scenario is included, and 
using the UFO with the BOMB-Kansas-City-Bombable-Testbed.xml
scenario is the easiest way to test most Bombable functions, aircraft,
and AI aircraft. (Based on FG's stock UFO, but with Bombable capabilities
added.)

* BOMB DAMAGE: Reconfigured damage impact of bombs; the bombs now act--look
and create damage--far closer to real data.

* NEW MENU: Re-vamped Bombable menu with new/streamlined/more 
sensible options.

* RESET DAMAGE: In the new Bombable menu you can reset damage for main aircraft 
and AI aircraft and objects.

* BOMBABLE SCENARIOS RENAMED: Renamed all scenarios that come with the 
package with prefix "BOMB-".  This should make it easier to find the 
scenarios and also update or remove them when necessary.

* SMALLER SMOKE/FIRE OPTION: A small fire option, used where 
appropriate, so that fires/explosions/damage don't always look so 
overly huge.

* UNUSABLE AIRCRAFT REMOVED: Removed unused/unusable aircraft from 
the distribution. Some of these are perfectly fine for general flying,
but weapons or other features don't work well with Bombable, and 
having them listed in the menus when they didn't really work made for 
confusion.

* SCENARIO FIXES: Some scenarios were not loading properly for some 
people in ver. 4.3. This might be because of inconsistencies in the 
case of some file and directory names. I worked on resolving this 
issue, but please let me know if it is still happening.

* SCENARIOS RENAMED: Renamed all scenarios to start with "BOMB-". 
This should help us keep straight which scenarios work with 
Bombable and also troubleshoot and track down & fix problems with 
scenarios.

* AI WEAPONS IMPROVED: AI weapons now malfunction when the AI 
aircraft, vehicle, or ship is damaged.

* MISC. UPDATES: Updated included AI aircraft and scenarios to fit 
with the new impact detection system.

* FOR BOMBABLE AIRCRAFT DESIGNERS: If you have designed aircraft to 
use with Bombable, you should look at the sample AI aircraft provided 
to see updates to the Bombable dimensions, vulnerabilities, and 
weapons sections. You will need to re-tool your aircraft slightly, 
but when finished the results will be much better.

* BUG FIXES: Various small bug fixed and improvements, fixed a lot 
of the programs with scenarios, AI Aircraft, directories.

* BOMBABLE IN THE FLIGHTGEAR WIKI: A new article on Bombable and and explanation of how to add Bombable to existing aircraft is here:

  http://wiki.flightgear.org/Bombable
  http://wiki.flightgear.org/Howto:_Adding_Bombable_to_FlightGear_Aircraft#Notes

See the To Do file (many of which have now been done) for many more 
changes, updates, and improvements.


4.3 
------------------------ 

* Multiplayer dogfighting is now working in FG 2.4.0. (It broke 
sometime in the FG 2.X.X. series.) Use one of the MP-dogfighting- 
enabled planes included in the packet (Sopwith Camel-Bombable/Yasim,
SPAD VII-Bombable, or FKDR1-Bombable/JSB, or 
A6M2-Bombable/YASim--use the versions marked as Guns/Bombable, not 
the default FG installs) and make sure your opponent does the 
same--you will both be able to shoot and damage each other, see 
damage reports, etc.

* Weapons on AI aircraft--which will shoot at you as you attack 
them--can now be placed in different locations and aimed in 
different directions.

In combat, they will shoot you if that location/direction is lined 
up with you. The AI B-17 Bomber included in the package will shoot 
at you from the rear; the M-1 tank will shoot towards the front at 
about a 45 degree angle, Jeep will shoot forwards and upwards, 
Ferries will shoot forward or backwards, etc.

The result is a far more realistic experience. Shooting bombers 
used to be like shooting fish in a barrel--now between the bombers 
shooting at you and the fighter planes coming in from high cover, 
you're lucky to score a few small hits and get out of there 
alive . . .

* The AI Weapons system was generally improved and weapon strength, 
direction, size, location, and effectiveness can be specified in the 
XML file for each AI aircraft type. (If you're creating your own 
Bombable-enable aircraft, just add weapons specs in the WEAPONS 
section of AI aircraft; see enclosed AI/Aircraft files for examples.)

* Generally tweaked AI aircraft, attack & weapons routines, and AI 
scenarios for a better, more realistic experience. In particular, 
try:

 - MarinCountyWWIIBombersWithCover.xml (fly A6M2-Bombable/YASim)
 - MarinCountyCamelInvasion1-Simple.xml (fly Sopwith Camel-Bombable/YASim)  

* Again worked on the problem of getting AI aircraft to climb and 
dive more realistically instead of sedately. The AI aircraft are far 
more realistic/active in the vertical direction now.

* Bombable no longer overwrites existing aircraft or anything else 
in FG's installation. It will add new aircraft and a few other 
Bombable-specific files. All new/added aircraft have the suffix 
-Bombable. Bombable will overwrite-replace things from its own 
previous installation, but no other files.

Generally when flying Bombable's AI scenarios or flying over 
multiplayer with another person using Bombable, your best 
experience will be to use one of the aircraft provided (and 
identifiable by the -Bombable extension) or another aircraft 
specifically set up to use Bombable's capabilities.



4.2
------------------------
* Made numerous changes/updates/improvements related to getting 
Bombable working with FG 2.4.0.

* Found the FG 2.4.0 "reinit" problem in both M-1 and Jeep in 
AI/Aircraft & fixed

* Reconfigured the damage calculations for light weapons in the 
test_impact function. Result may be that it is harder/takes more 
hits than before to damage aircraft or objects. If it is too hard 
you can select both "Easy Mode" and "Super Easy Mode" together to 
make it quite a bit easier to both hit targets and create damage. 
This still needs some refinement but it is setting the groundwork 
for a better, more consistent way of dealing with damage.

* Small refinements in display, damage reports, etc.

* FG 2.4.0 is doing this crazy thing where it reinitializes AI 
objects in scenario repeatedly and also (sometimes!) slips in non-AI 
objects like joystick inputs for initialization as AI/scenario 
objects. This results in massive slowdowns and other bizarre 
behavior. So I've set up checks to disallow repeated re-inits of AI 
objects and only allow AI and Multiplayer objects (as opposed 
joystick input devices, etc) to initialize themselves with Bombable. 
The ultimate solution here is a FG code fix, but in the meanwhile 
some of the worst effects might be mitigated.


4.0
------------------------
This is a beta release that works with Flightgear 2.4.0. Some AI 
aircraft characteristics have changed in FG 2.4.0 so there are some 
problems and different behavior in the AI aircraft.

* Removed the "reinit" command in bombable.nas that made FG 2.4.0 
croak.

* Removed the mp_broadcast.nas file that is no longer necessary with 
FG 2.4.0 (and in fact the old version included with Bombable made FG 
2.4.0 choke).

* FG 2.4.0 doesn't make the weight or mass of the armament available 
on impact (previous versions}}} did!), so a kludgy work-around was 
created.

* Numerous other tweaks and bug fixes.

3.0p
------------------------
This is a bit of an alpha release and has not been as thoroughly 
tested with all scenarios as previous releases.

AI AIRCRAFT ARE MORE MOBILE VERTICALLY: AI Aircraft dodge and chase 
you more vertically, diving and climbing.

VARIOUS BUGFIXES


3.0o
------------------------
AI AIRCRAFT SHOOT AT AND DAMAGE YOU: When in an AI dogfight, if you 
let the AI aircraft get into position they have a chance to shoot at 
and possibly damage you. This is working best with WWI AI Aircraft 
(Camel, SPAD, Fokker) as in the Marin County Camel Invasion 
scenarios, but it will also work with the Zero and Warthog scenarios.

MOSTLY FIXED MENU/OPTIONS SAVE/RESTORE BUG: Some of the options 
still don't save/restore correctly, but most do now.

NUMEROUS OTHER BUGFIXES/SMALL IMPROVEMENTS



3.0n
------------------------
AI AIRCRAFT DODGE AND 'ATTACK' REALISTICALLY: AI dogfights just 
became 10X as realistic, as fighter planes will turn and attack, 
just as fighter planes did in WWI and WWII. Try the Marin County 
Camel Invasion and Marin County Zero Invasion scenarios for a taste 
of how this works. (No weapons for AI aircraft yet--maybe in the 
future.)

NEW SCENARIO--B-17 BOMBERS WITH FIGHTER COVER: Fly out of Marin 
Ranch and attack a squadron of 6 B-17 Bombers. As you do so, the 
fighter squadrons descend and swarm you. They don't fire at you 
(yet! fodder for future versions!) but they turn aggressively 
towards you, evade your shots, etc., just as real fighters would.

DAMAGED AI AIRCRAFT CRASH MORE REALISTICALLY

GREATLY IMPROVED, MORE REALISTIC DAMAGE ANALYSIS: Damage assessment 
for guns is a lot more realistic, giving greater damage when you hit 
closer to the center of the object and allowing for the possibility 
that even small arms might strike a vital or explosive point, 
causing catastrophic damage. For instance, you can now damage the 
Nimitz or Eisenhower*--though it's still tough to sink.

MORE REALISTIC FIRE STARTING: One of the chief causes of combat 
aircraft damage is the fires that even small caliber weapons can 
cause--and fires are even more likely with heavier ammo that 
includes incendiary (high explosive) materials. Bombable now models 
that any hit may start a fire, and heavier rounds are more likely to 
start files. Fires progressively damage the aircraft and eventually 
bring it down. Beware that fires sometimes go out before completely 
disabling the aircraft--so monitor the enemy aircraft to make sure 
they do not recover and escape.

MORE REALISTIC AIRCRAFT SMOKE STARTING: Similar to fire starting, 
each damaging hit has the possibility to cause damage that causes 
the aircraft to emit a trail of smoke. The bigger/closer the hit, 
the more likely to cause this damage.

BOMBABLE PREFERENCES/SETTINGS SAVED AND RESTORED AT STARTUP

FIXED EXCESSIVE DAMAGE REPORT PROBLEM: Aircraft would continually 
report damage even after objects received 100% damage--now fixed.

NUMEROUS SMALL BUGFIXES

* Note: You can bomb the Nimitz/Eisenhower carriers if you have the 
bombable carriers add-on: 
http://www.flightgear.org/forums/viewtopic.php?f=2&t=7082


3.0m
------------------------
Positive and negative G-force limits are now settable separately 
(most aircraft have different limits for positive vs negative G, so 
this adds some realism)

Bugfixes on damage & damage report

Every hit now registers via on-screen popup (vs previous behavior of 
only showing damage when it increased past multiples of 5%)

Bugfixes on g-force damage that caused extraneous very high g forces 
to cause random damage

Bugfixes in multiplayer communication, fixed problems when MP is 
disabled or doesn't exist

Bugfix on bombable multiplayer unload (runtime error "listenerids") 
and improvement to unload routines

Fixed Easy/Super Easy Mode malfunction (Super Easy Mode never 
engaged; new default mode is Easy Mode which should give same 
performance as previous default mode)

Tuned damage/vulnerabilities on ferries (San Francisco Ferry 
Invasion scenario)


3.0L
------------------------
OVERSPEED DETECTION/DAMAGE

G-FORCE AND OVERSPEED DETECTION OPTIONAL - Switches in the Bombable 
menu to turn it off; turned off by default except for planes 
included in Bombable package.

VULNERABILITIES FRAMEWORK FOR PRIMARY AIRCRAFT - allows max 
acceleration, max speed parameters to be set individually per 
aircraft (main aircraft) and then damage from 
overspeed/overacceleration is accrued when those limits are exceeded.

BLACKOUT/REDOUT TUNABLE PER AIRCRAFT - allows blackout & redout 
values to be set per aircraft--for instance to reflect that WWI 
aircraft had no pressure suits or special high-G training. This will 
help level the playing field and create uniformity in MP dogfighting 
with similar aircraft.

G-FORCE AND OVERSPEED LIMITS AND DAMAGE AMOUNTS TUNED - for the four 
aircraft included in the Bombable package (A6M2 Zero, Sopwith Camel, 
SPAD VII, Fokker DR1) the g-force damage & overspeed damage 
parameters have been individually tuned and are fairly realistic.

FIRES ONLY FOR APPROPRIATE DAMAGE - Overspeed & overacceleration 
(g-force) damage doesn't start a fire, though it will still rack up 
100% damage and shut you down.

BUGFIXES - a large number of bugfixes


3.0k
------------------------
EXCESSIVE G-FORCE DAMAGES YOUR AIRCRAFT: Excessive g-force now adds 
damage to your airframe and can even make you crash. To avoid 
damaging your aircraft due to excessive g-force, always fly with 
blackout/redout turned on and avoid pulling g-forces much beyond 
those that make you blackout or redout.

ZEROS OVER MARIN COUNTY SCENARIO: Marin County Zero Invasion 
scenario added.


3.0j (private release)
------------------------
BURN/SMOKE ON CRASH: Aircraft now catch fire, burn, and instantly go 
to 100% damage when they crash. This is broadcast via MP so others 
will see you burn when you crash.

A5MW ZERO FOR DOGFIGHTING: A6M2 ready for MP dogfighting included in 
release.

A6M2 ZERO: Added historically accurate guns and cannons (fire with e 
and E) to A6M2 Zero.

BOMBABLE A62M ZERO: Included Bombable version of the AI A6M2 Zero 
from Hellcat's Carrier Bombable project, but also made a few 
tweaks/improvements to he AI A6M2 for improved realism. See 
http://www.4shared.com/file/235605076/6101800f/carrier_bombable.html

DOGFIGHTING: Greatly improved dogfighting/multiplayer communication 
of damages

BUGFIX DR 1: Added keyboard firing switch to Fokker DR 1 (use the 
'e' key to fire the weapons).

BUGFIXES: Many other miscellaneous bug fixes and improvements.


3.0i
------------------------
RESET RESETS DAMAGE: In dogfighting, resetting or using the Location 
menu to change your location resets your damage to 0% and broadcasts 
that to others flying with you via multiplayer

FLIGHTGEAR 2.0 COMPATIBLE: Tested and works with FG 2.0 as well as 
FG 1.9 and CVS versions between 1.9 and 2.0

BUGFIXES: Various small bugfixes



Versions 3.0 through 3.0h
-------------------------
BOMBABLE/SHOOTABLE: Code to make objects, AI aircraft, MP aircraft 
bombable and shootable.

MOVING AI BOMBABLE/SHOOTABLE OBJECTS: Code to allow AI aircraft, 
naval vessels, and surface vehicles to move (sort of) realistically 
and act as bombable/moving aerial targets.

SCENARIOS: Bombing and dogfighting scenarios using these AI aircraft.

MULTIPLAYER DOGFIGHTING: Code to allow multiplayer (MP) 
communication of damage to aircraft, allowing multiplayer dogfighting

AIRCRAFT ENHANCEMENTS--WEAPONS AND DOGFIGHTING: Three WWI era 
aircraft enhanced with historically accurate weapons systems and 
prepared for MP dogfighting (Sopwith Camel, Fokker DR1, SPAD-VII)

CONTRAILS AND SMOKE: MP aircraft capable of dogfighting, and some 
other MP and AI aircraft automatically have contrails and engine 
smoke trails. This makes it possible to locate the aircraft when 
doing MP dogfighting and generally adds to the realism.