MULTIPLAYER DOGFIGHTING WITH BOMBABLE

**Following are instructions for dogfighting with the Bombable mod 
for FlightGear (tested with 1.9.1,2.0, 2.4.0). See 
bombable-readme.txt for details about getting the whole package 
installed and working.**

VERY IMPORTANT NOTE: MULTIPLAYER DOGFIGHTING ONLY WORKS WITH CERTAIN 
VERY SPECIFIC AIRCRAFT THAT ARE SPECIALLY SET UP FOR MULTIPLAYER 
DOGFIGHTING. AND IT WORKS **ONLY IF BOTH YOU AND THE PERSON YOU ARE 
DOGFIGHTING** HAVE BOMBABLE INSTALLED ***AND*** ARE USING THOSE 
SPECIFIC DOGFIGHTING-ENABLED AIRCRAFT.

If you install the Bombable package you will soon note that you can 
shoot at and destroy pretty much any aircraft, and any aircraft that 
can shoot weapons or drop bombs seems to work fine as the main 
aircraft.

True! But this **does not mean that those same aircraft will work for 
multiplayer dogfighting!** If you want to dogfight over multi-player, 
please read the instructions below very carefully.

Both people MUST install bombable, both people must enable 
FlightGear's multi-player option on FlightGear startup, both people 
must check the "Multiplayer enabled" checkbox in the Bombable menu 
within FlightGear, AND both people must use one of the few 
dogfighting-enabled aircraftm, which are listed below and included
in the Bombable distribution.


GETTING STARTED WITH MULTIPLAYER DOGFIGHTING 

1. Get a partner to also load the bombable package

2. Both choose one of these aircraft--look for the aircraft in the FGRun listing with the suffix -Bombable:

   - Sopwith Camel (YASim, Guns/Bombable)
   - SPAD VII (YASim, Guns/Bombable)
   - Fokker DR 1 Triplane (Fokker Dr.1, JSB, Guns/Bombable)
   - A6M2 Zero (YASim, Guns/Bombable)
   - F6F Hellcat - Bombable
   - A10-Bombable
   - ufo-Bombable (mostly just for testing, but you can have UFO dogfights if you like!)

   
    NOTE: If you choose a different aircraft from those listed above, 
    Bombable Multiplayer will not work. Note that there are similar 
    aircraft but without the Guns/Bombable additions, which are included 
    in the base FG distribution. If you choose one of those aircraft 
    (lacking the Guns/Bombable additions), Bombable Multiplayer will not 
    work.
   
3. Enable multiplayer (see general FG instructions for doing this).

4. Enable multiplayer in the Bombable menu within FlightGear (it is 
enabled by default).

5. Go to same location within FG and dogfight each other.

It is helpful to open an MPMap in a browser window to help you locate 
each other. In FG 2.4.0 and higher you can use Equipment/Map in the 
main FG dialog. Enable "Traffic" to see the other Multiplayer and AI 
aircraft. Again, see general FG multiplayer instructions for details.

You will be able to see the damage you are doing to the other person 
(or people) and status messages will appear with your own damage 
level.

The aircraft stay coordinated so that, for instance, if you shoot a 
plane and it catches on fire the person on the other end of the 
multiplayer sees that their plane has been hit and started on fire.

Once your damage reaches 100% your engines stop (magnetos off and 
throttle to zero). This is simply an indication to you that you have 
been defeated--Bombable doesn't try to model aircraft damage 
realistically beyond this simple indication.

To reset your damage level simply choose file/reset or use the 
Location menu to reposition yourself--either will stop all 
smoke/fires and reset your damage level to 0%.


AIRPLANES FOR MULTIPLAYER DOGFIGHTS

So far only these planes work with Multiplayer Dogfighting:

   - Sopwith Camel (YASim, Guns/Bombable)
   - SPAD VII (YASim, Guns/Bombable)
   - Fokker DR 1 Triplane (Fokker Dr.1, JSB, Guns/Bombable)
   - A6M2 Zero (YASim, Guns/Bombable)


Other planes, such as the A-10 or any FG aircraft with working 
weapons, could easily be modded to work with Bombable dogfighting. 
(The aircraft need to have a generic multiplayer string added in 
their -set.xml file, plus have their AI versions installed with 
bombable; see included files for examples.)

EASY MODE & MULTIPLAYER

In MP mode, everyone dogfighting together should choose same settings 
for Easy Mode, Super Easy mode, and Realistic Mode, or it won't be 
fair. To change those settings, use the "Bombable" menu within 
FlightGear.

When starting, I strongly suggest choosing BOTH Easy and Super Easy 
Modes (they add together to make a Super-duper Easy Mode). If you 
don't do that, you will soon become VERY frustrated trying to hit 
another plane.

However I believe based on some research and reading that with Easy & 
Super Easy Modes disabled the difficulty is very, very close to real 
dogfighting. It was NOT easy to get a hit or a kill and most kills 
happened at very close range.

(Or by luck, as with the single shot that downed the Red Baron--but 
you can get lucky with a single shot in FG also. Just like in real 
life it doesn't happen very often, though--most often it takes a 
large number of hits and near hits made at close range.)

FILE RESET & MULTIPLAYER

When you choose "File/reset" or reposition your aircraft using the 
"Location" menu, your aircraft's fire, smoke, and damage will be 
reset to 0%.

When another player resets, a message will appear on your screen 
indicating the reset.

STRATEGY

See the included file "dicta-boelcke-rules-for-ww1-dogfighting.txt" 
for ideas on strategy and tactics--it all applies in the FG world.

Keep in mind that WWI era fighter pilots were aggressive fighters who 
wanted to engage and down other aircraft and found the best strategy 
when attacked was, "Always turn and face the attack."

Obviously there is a way to do this strategically but in general 
dogfighting happens when you turn and engage other pilots. Unless 
your aircraft are terribly mismatched, if you have some distance on 
the other pilot you can generally avoid any fight by simply flying 
away from the attacking aircraft.

So if you want to avoid a dogfight, there is your strategy--just fly 
away. If, on the other hand, you want to dogfight, put yourself and 
partner(s) in well-matched aircraft and then--seek each other out and 
attack. That's how they did it in real life.


SIMULATION VS GAME

"FlightGear is a simulation, not a game" is a commonly heard dictum 
in the FlightGear world.

True--yet military aircraft do have weapons and those weapons are 
designed to be used, both in training and, when the time comes, in 
armed conflict. A simulation that omits this important aspect of 
military aircraft is not a complete simulation. Many of the 
aeronautical capabilities of military aircraft are created 
specifically to meet the needs of the weapons systems they carry and 
the combat roles the aircraft is designed for.

Weapons in a flight simulator can certainly be abused to turn the 
simulator into a simplistic shoot-em-up game, but by the same token 
they can be used to simulate realistic flying and realistic missions 
in a way that most of us will never be able to experience first hand.

And, yeah--they can make it more fun.

Is that a problem?

 