SOPWITH CAMEL: A REALISTIC JSBSIM FLIGHT MODEL - NOTES

Version 1.0

Brent Hugh, 30 March 2013

brent@brenthugh.com

PURPOSE

In flying the existing Sopwith Camel flight models in Flightgear with Bombable 
in simulated combat situations, the shortcomings of these flight models became 
apparent. Flightgear flight models are typically designed and optimized for 
flying aircraft well within their design envelopes, and work very well in 
those situations.

However, combat aircraft are often operated near the limits--or even over the 
limits--of their documented capabilities. Particularly for an aircraft like 
the Camel, working with and against the quirks of its design was an integral 
part of operating the aircraft in both everyday operations and in combat. 
These operational quirks were openly exploited by combat pilots.

As one writer said:

  I enjoyed flying the Camel, but its vices of control instability, extreme 
  control sensitivity and pronounced gyroscopic effects all combined to create 
  the impression of balancing an egg on the point of a needle rather than flying 
  an aircraft . . .

  It was never forced into manoeuvres - they were executed by
  light pressure on the controls and subsequently relaxing, or sometimes 
  reversing, the pressure once the desired rate of response was attained.

I set out to create a flight model of the Camel that would incorporate as many 
of the documented combat flight characteristics of the Camel as possible, and 
in as realistic a way as possible.

Technical and operations manuals of the Camel are available that give a 
baseline for its capabilities and operation, and the JSBSim flight model now 
very closely matches those public specifications. However, extensive wind 
tunnel testing data, which would give far more detailed data about performance 
of the aircraft in different situations--and which is often available for more 
modern aircraft--is not available for the Camel as far as I know.

For that reason, I have relied on detailed reports by pilots of historical and 
modern Sopwith Camels, which give an account of characteristics, quirks, and 
typical solutions used by pilots, and used these first-hand sources to guide 
the development of the flight model.

CAMEL FLIGHT CHARACTERISTICS IMPLEMENTED IN THE FDM

Camel flight characteristics are documented below and in the included files.

Below is a list of Camel flight characteristics implemented in this JSBSim 
flight model, with a rating of the effectiveness of the current implementation 
on a scale of 1-5:

    1 - Not implemented
    
    2 - Partially implemented
    
    3 - Well implemented
    
    4 - As well implemented as possible, as far as I (a non-pilot) can determine 5 
    - As well implemented as possible, according to an expert Camel pilot

4 Weight, fuel capacity & weight, hp, dimensions and other technical details 
implemented as described in attached article, 'The Sopwith "Camel"', The 
Automobile, Nov 7, 1918.

4 Best available calculations for moment of inertia of engine/propellor, prop 
thrust, moment of inertia of aircraft wings and body. See included file 
Camel-JSBSim-calcs-2011-10D.xls. NOTE: These results could/should be verified 
and improved by actual measurement and testing of an aircraft, by wind tunnel 
data, or by extensive testing and feedback of the model by an experienced 
Camel pilot.

4 Speed, RPM, horsepower of climbing and horizontal flight closes matches 
published number. See for example the speed/climb rate graphs comparing the 
JSBSim Camel and a historical 1917 Camel in the Docs subdirectory, file 
Camel-JSBSim-calcs-2011-10D.xls NOTE: The numbers to not match exactly, of 
course--tweaking parameters in JSBSim you can match any single parameter 
exactly put not several parameters of different types exactly. Nevertheless 
the results are very close, definitely show the characteristics of the Camel 
(vs any of the other similar aircraft of the period) and in fact is probably 
close enough to be within the bounds of individual variation of production 
Camels. TODO: Tweak dive rate/speed to better match historical Camel.

3.5 Max sustained turn rate about 76 deg/sec (near stall speed, level flight, 
sea level). TODO: Re-check turn rate.

4 Quick/light response to controls

4 The gyroscopic effect causes the nose to rise in a left-hand turn (moreso 
that most other similar aircraft)

4 The gyroscopic effect causes nose to drop in a right-hand turn

4 Fairly large amounts of left rudder were needed in both L & R turns to 
correct

4 Sluggish in left turns. Quicker through 270 degrees to the right than 90 
degrees to the left. TODO: This may require some more refinement

4 Sensitive in a turn, if the turn were tightened just a little, it was likely 
to whip into a tight spin.

4 All the weight of the engine, guns, and pilot was concentrated in the first 
seven feet of a short 18-foot fuselage.

3.5 Camel's elevator was powerful and sensitive. TODO: May require some 
further refinement.

3.5 Rudder was too small and relatively ineffective. TODO: May require some 
further refinement.

4 Accelerating the aircraft caused the nose to climb, and swing to the left.

4 At 110 miles per hour, there was about 15 to 20 pounds of back force on the 
control column, which could not be trimmed out because the aircraft had no 
pilot-adjustable, moveable horizontal stabilize

3.7 Moving the stick forward to enter a dive caused the Camel to yaw left 
because of gyroscopic force, and correcting this yaw with right rudder caused 
the nose to pitch down sharply. TODO: Effect is definitely there but may 
require some refinement

4 Steerable tail skid of the Camel helped to overcome a slight swing to the 
left as I opened the throttle.

4 The tail came up at about 20 knots.

4 Lifts off about 35-40 knots

4 Able to take off & land in a very short distance, especially on a field and 
with a headwind--see for instance: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VT9wtDNiKaI 
With a 15 mph headwind, JSBSim Camel now matches this takeoff almost exactly. 
The rollout matches pretty well, too--though obviously much depends on the 
exact surface and other details.

4 Right rudder needed to keep AC on course early in roll-out

3.7 Left rudder needed later in roll-out as speed increases. NOTE: The JSBSim 
doesn't currently require *full* L rudder, as some sources indicate, so some 
refinement may be needed or these sources may be slightly exaggerating.

3.7 In a wind of 10 to 15 knots you are airborne in a couple of plane lengths 
at 35 mph. TODO: JSBSim is currently just a little over, this--airborn at 40 
knots approx.

4 Rate of climb of almost 1,000 feet a minute climbing out of take-off.

4 Capable of looping, 110 mph required.

4 Being slightly tail-heavy it goes up and over in an incredibly small circle 
in the sky, and faster than any other WWI aircraft I have flown.

4 Tail heavy with full fuel

2.5 Slightly nose heavy with empty fuel. TODO: With fuel nearly empty it is 
noticeably less tail heavy than with full fuel, but not quite to the point of 
nose heavy. Requires further tweaking.

4 As you slow down over the top of the loop you must feed in rudder against 
the torque.

2.5 On strafing runs, as soon as the airspeed reaches 130 to 140 mph the nose 
begins to hunt up and down, and the elevator becomes extremely sensitive. I 
feel this action is due largely to the square windshield between the two 
Vickers guns, causing a substantial burble over the tail surfaces. TODO: 
JSBSim model does become more unstable above 150 mph or so but this effect 
could likely be modelled more precisely.

3.5 In stalls at 35 to 40 mph the nose drops frighteningly fast and hard to 
the right, but you also get control back quickly, although a surprising amount 
of altitude has been lost. I have had the pleasure of limited dog fighting 
with other WWI fighters, and there are none that can stay with a Camel in a 
turn. TODO: JSBSim model stalls almost exactly as described, but nose drops 
hard to L instead of R. This can likely be tweaked in the model.

4 Very quick half-roll (a touch of left rudder for a half roll, then a quick 
half-loop was a often-used maneuver to reverse direction).

4 Twin Vickers machine guns, 400 round capacity (historically 250-400 seems to 
have been the range), best known realistic mass, ballistic, and
aerodynamic characteristics for rounds, firing rate, characteristics of tracer 
rounds, etc. Historically realistic re-loading scenario (requires landing, 
full stop, engine off). See camel-alternative-submodels.xml for information 
and documentation. NOTE: Aerodynamic characteristics of machine gun rounds 
could be tweaked if better data were available; tracer visuals could be made 
more realistic.

2 Mixture needed constant manual adjustment; first adjustment about 250 about 
ground on liftoff. TODO: Mixture is does not require the constant adjustment 
described by Camel pilots--it acts more as a typical modern auto-mixture. I'm 
not sure if JSBSIM can do this more realistically out of the box; this may 
require custom Nasal programming to implement.

2.5 Control of engine thrust via blip switch and magneto rather than throttle. 
NOTE: Pilots can simulate the realistic historical way of controlling the 
Camel's engine using this method: Leave throttle at full position at all times;
manipulate engine power through use of the magnetos and blip switch alone. 
Engine power with one and with two magnetos engaged is very close to that 
described in technical specifications; operating with one magneto creates a 
low-power setting. TODO: A more realistic flight experience would be to 
connect the joystick throttle control to the mixture, allowing constant 
adjustment of the mixture as necessary, and leave throttle always at full with 
engine power adjusted by magnetos and blip switch.

1 Engine start. JSBSim engine start requires a very extended cranking period. 
Camel engines were notoriously difficult to start, but given the manual engine 
starting methods of the day, they must have started either with a quick crank 
or not at all.


DOCUMENTS
A number of relevant documents and notes, including facsimiles, articles, and 
calculations, are included in the Docs folder of this distribution.

Below is a compilation of notes and comments by pilots with experience flying 
the Camel.

---

Max sustained turn rate is about 76 deg/sec. That is near stall speed, level 
flight, at sea level. p. 7 

A graph of speed vs climb rate is given for the Camel and four other
aircraft from the same era (p. 7).  

http://home.comcast.net/~clipper-108/AIAAPaper2005-119.pdf 

---

"I lived its quick response - it was so remarkably swift and sensitive that it 
demanded constant attention. The torque caused the nose to rise in aleft-hand 
turn and rop in aright-hand turn. Fairly large amounts of left rudder were 
needed in bothturns to correct for these idiosyncrasis. The tiny biplane was 
so snesitive in a turn, however, that if the turn were tightened just a little,
 it was likely to whip into a tight spin - quickly and without warning. Oddly 
this very ease for spining was used in combat by many pilots to shake a 
persisten German from their tails. sopwith Came vs Fokker Dr 1: Western Front 
1917-18 by Jon Guttman, Harry Dempsey, quoting from mark Curtis Kinney's 
memoir, I Flew a Camel

---

Here is a description about the Camel's traits from BARKER VC, (via author 
Wayne Ralph at 
http://www.theaerodrome.com/forum/2001/11306-sopwith-camel-flight-characteristics.html 
):

Quote:

All the weight of the engine, guns, and pilot was concentrated in the first 
seven feet of a short 18-foot fuselage. The various models of rotary engine 
fitted to the Camel, from a 110-hp Le Rhone, to a 130-hp Clerget, to a 150-hp 
Bentley, had the propeller attached to the engine crankcase and the crankshaft 
to the aircraft so that the propeller and engine revolved together at more 
than 1250 rpm. This heavy whirling engine was lubricated continually by castor 
oil which was not recycled, but rather was burned in the combustion process 
and vented overboard, soaking the aircraft, the pilot's flying suit, helmet 
and goggles. The gyroscopic forces that were generated varied in intensity 
based on a complex interaction of engine rpm, aircraft speed, and control 
input. The scout had a different character turning left or right, as did all 
the rotary-engined aeroplanes, but the Camel to an extreme degree. It was 
sluggish in left turns and the nose always pitched up, while right turns were 
very quick, with the nose dropping sharply. Without plenty of top (ie, left) 
rudder to correct the pitch down, it would spin. A Camel pilot had to apply 
left rudder turning left or right, the amount varying with aircraft speed and 
engine rpm. Since the engine rotation countered the input of left stick and 
rudder, some pilots made all turns to the right because the aircraft was 
quicker through 270 degrees, than 90 degrees to the left. The Camel's elevator 
was powerful and sensitive, while the rudder was too small and relatively 
ineffective. Coordinated turns demanded a fine touch. Correcting sideslip, the 
tendency of the aeroplane to slide to the inside of a banked turn, by applying 
opposite rudder, caused the Camel to tighten up in the turn. In steep turns 
over 45 degrees of bank, the aircraft tended to pitch up its nose, and tighten 
up its bank angle as speed reduced, requiring continual adjustments in the 
amount of forward pressure on the stick with engine rpm changes. In the words 
of test pilot W/C Paul A. Hartman, RCAF, the Camel has no 'dynamic 
longitudinal stability' in steep turns. Accelerating the aircraft caused the 
nose to climb, and swing to the left. At 110 miles per hour, there was about 
15 to 20 pounds of back force on the control column, which could not be 
trimmed out because the aircraft had no pilot-adjustable, moveable horizontal 
stabilizer. Therefore, Camel pilots had to fly two-to-three hour missions, 
continually applying forward pressure just to maintain level flight. Letting 
go resulted in the aircraft pitching up, and rolling inverted to the right. 
Moving the stick forward to enter a dive caused the Camel to yaw left because 
of gyroscopic force, and correcting this yaw with right rudder caused the nose 
to pitch down sharply. By today's standards the Camel was completely 
unacceptable, and yet many pilots of 1917-8, most with under 100 hours of 
flying time used it as a lethal weapon.

---

http://www.theaerodrome.com/forum/2001/11306-sopwith-camel-flight-characteristics-3.html
In 
those notes are a description of when and why the mixture had to be adjusted. 
If memory serves, it was perilously low to the ground, under 250 feet. The 
shift to left rudder would have to have taken place either just before or just 
after this, because the whole point of changing the mixture was that the 
engine would have been on the verge of choking, which means that you'd be 
trying to maintain flying speed.

My guess is that the shift would have to happen within 10-20 seconds of 
getting airborne under normal circumstances.

---

"...all flights of these early machines were conducted from the grass surface 
of the airfield, not the paved runways, and the steerable tail skid of the 
Camel helped to overcome a slight swing to the left as I opened the throttle. 
The tail came up at about 20 knots.

As the speed reached 40 knots I eased the stick back slightly and the Camel 
became airborne. It accelerated rapidly to 55 knots and I held it in a climb 
at that speed until I reached 500 feet. I leveled off, leaned the mixture, and 
started a left hand turn. The gyroscopic effect from the rotary engine quickly 
became apparent...

...I enjoyed flying the Camel, but its vices of control instability, extreme 
control sensitivity and pronounced gyroscopic effects all combined to create 
the impression of balancing an egg on the point of a needle rather than flying 
an aircraft...it was never forced into manoeuvres - they were executed by 
light pressure on the controls and subsequently relaxing, or sometimes 
reversing, the pressure once the desired rate of response was attained.

By modern standards of stability and control, the Camel would be totally 
unacceptable as a military aircraft...

(quoted from Canada's National Aviation Museum - Its History and Collection, 
by K.M. Molson)

http://www.theaerodrome.com/forum/2001/11306-sopwith-camel-flight-characteristics.html
---
"As 
I opened the throttle I simultaneously applied full left rudder and as I 
became airborn I found that I had full left rudder on. (This was the answer 
always, as I afterwards found, and I was never in trouble again from this 
cause)"

August 98 issue of FLight journal has the flying of the Camel by Rich King. 
160 Hp Gnome engine (yes, rotary) qoute:

..Right rudder is needed to keep the Camel tracking straight ahead while it is 
on the runway, and as the tail comes up, I find that my rudder correction was 
right on. I m facing straight down the center of the runway.........A little 
back pressure on the control stick and the bumpy ground falls away behind me, 
and the Camels speed continues to increase at an exhilarating rate. A little 
forward pressure on the "closh handle" hold the aeroplane a few feet above the 
runway while its speed continues to increase. .... Left Rudder is now needed 
to keep the racing Camel straight....." end quote

http://www.theaerodrome.com/forum/2001/11306-sopwith-camel-flight-characteristics-2.html
---
From 
the Frank Tallman book "Flying the old planes"...

My Sopwith Camel is, as far as I'm aware, the only original World War 1 Camel 
ever brought back to flying condition. It was originally owned by Colonel 
Jarrett of the Jarrett War Museum located on the old Steel Pier in Atlantic 
City; who in the 1930's had the best museum of WWI equipment ever assembled, 
including the Belgian War Museum in Brussels. The Jarrett Museum fell on hard 
times following WWII and, with time and money on my side after my service 
period, and a lifelong ambition of owning a WWI aircraft, I purchased for a 
small sum (by today's standards) several antique aircraft including the Camel, 
a Nieuport 28, a Pfalz D.XII, a Fokker D.VII and a SPAD VII.

The Camel was the first WWI aircraft I brought back to flying condition and 
required some major rebuilding, which took several years, many thousands of 
dollars and a whole host of experts including Paul Poberzney of the 
Experimental Aircraft Association, the gifted master craftsman Ned Kensinger, 
the Hawker Siddeley Group and a number of very dedicated volunteer's.

(NB: There is quite a bit on the rebuilding process in the Chapter but I have 
left it out of this extract for the sake of space).

When the day finally came to fly the air was filled with great anticipation. 
On arrival at the airport though I was dismayed to hear from my team that they 
had been trying to get the temperamental 110 h.p. Le Rhone started since 
8.00am that morning, without success. The lack of knowledge amongst us 
regarding the Le Rhone was appalling. Did we have spark? Yes. Was the mag set? 
Yes. Had the commutator ring been wiped off? Yes. Had we primed it? Only every 
other cylinder.

With only a vague notion of what I was doing I clambered into the cockpit (a 
very tight fit) and reviewed the cord-wrapped Spade stick, the Block tube, 
carburettors next to one's knees, the flexible air intake to the outside air 
scoops, the wood wire brace longerons, the instrument panel with it's clutter 
and the duel control cables to the wooden rudder bar. At my request, the crew 
forced open the intake valves as the engine was pushed through (switch off) 
and shot a charge of fuel in each cylinder, as the cylinder came in front of 
the hole in the cowling. By accident, rather than by knowledge, I advanced the 
long lever controlling the air, and in pushing the manet (a small wheel knob 
on the miniature control quadrant) forward and then returning it, I had hit on 
the correct starting procedure. Wonder of wonders, as I flipped the 
porcelain-mounted switch up and called for contact, the Le Rhone started with 
a full-throated bellow, scaring both me and the crew!

By shoving the fuel-controlling lever forward and using the coupe (cut-out) 
button on the stick, I was able to keep the engine running. Soon the 
never-to-be-forgotten smell of castor oil infused our area, and the sight of 
oil splattering the leading edge of the low wings indicated that the engine 
was lubricating properly. Taxiing practice ended ignominiously a hundred feet 
from the starting point, when my newfound knowledge wasn't equal to the 
delicate adjustment of fuel and air, and the Le Rhone quit.

The revitalised ground crew hauled the 900 pound airplane over the grass and 
faced me into the wind. For safety sake we changed the plugs, and the Le Rhone 
started first try. I headed down the field with the throttle wide open. The 
tail came up almost instantly, and visibility was good, except for the Aldis 
sight and the twin Vickers. Not having planned on flight it came as something 
of a shock to find the Camel airborne at about 35 mph after a ground run of 
just 150 feet. Being afraid of jockeying with my ticklish fuel and air 
controls I stayed low and just got used to the Camel's sensitive ailerons, 
elevators and rudder.

I circled the field once, got into position for landing, shut fuel air and 
switch off, and made a light forward slip, touching down gently on three 
points. Total landing couldn't have been much longer than the initial take-off 
run.

So much for my first (unintentional) flight in the Camel.

Since then I've spent more time flying the Camel than any of the other 
historical aircraft in our collection. I've also had more forced landings in 
it than all the rest of the WWI aircraft combined. It's that temperamental Le 
Rhone. Cylinders have blown, magneto's have failed, even fouled spark plugs 
have brought me down unceremoniously, with sweating hands and my heart in my 
mouth, desperately seeking a patch of open ground on which to land. Yet for 
all that it's the one I turn to first for any show or exhibition, as the Camel 
gets my blood going like no other. This is an aircraft that is a joy to fly.

With the Le Rhone 9J, you cannot adjust either the fuel or air intake without 
running the risk of a dead-stick landing. You must leave them alone and use 
you Coupe (cut-out) button for all fight handling.

The take-off run is easy. In a wind of 10 to 15 knots you are airborne in a 
couple of plane lengths at 35 mph and climbing out at 60 mph, with a rate of 
climb of almost 1,000 feet a minute. The elevators are sensitive, as is the 
rudder. Consequently, when fling for any distance I often put the heels of my 
shoes on the floor tie wires, because the vibration of the Le Rhone through 
the rudder bar exaggerates the rudder movements.

In level flight at 100 mph indicated, the Camel is delightful, with just a 
hint of rudder being required for straight flight. The structure is rugged 
enough to feel comfortable in loops, and being slightly tail-heavy it goes up 
and over in an incredibly small circle in the sky, and faster than any other 
WWI aircraft I have flown. Sneeze and your halfway through a loop before your 
aware of what's happened. 110 mph is enough to carry you through, and as you 
slow down over the top you must feed in rudder against the torque.

In military shows I have ground strafed, and as soon as the airspeed reaches 
130 to 140 mph the nose begins to hunt up and down, and the elevator becomes 
extremely sensitive. I feel this action is due largely to the square 
windshield between the two Vickers guns, causing a substantial burble over the 
tail surfaces.

Turns are what the Camel is all about. Turning to the right with the torque 
requires the top rudder to hold the nose up, and the speed with which you can 
complete a 360-degree turn is breathtaking. Left turns are slower, with the 
nose wanting to rise during the turn. But small rudder input easily keeps the 
nose level with the horizon. In stalls at 35 to 40 mph the nose drops 
frighteningly fast and hard to the right, but you also get control back 
quickly, although a surprising amount of altitude has been lost. I have had 
the pleasure of limited dog fighting with other WWI fighters, and there are 
none that can stay with a Camel in a turn.

With the Le Rhone being temperamental as it is, flying the Camel is best done 
at times when there are few other aircraft in the sky, leaving easy access to 
the airport in cases of emergency. The Camel touches down easily but runs out 
of rudder control almost instantly, and if you bounce your landing at all, you 
are likely to find yourself in a hairy ground loop looking at a rapidly 
bending aileron dragging in the grass.

For a wide variety of reasons, the Camel is a fascinating airplane, 
flight-wise as well as historically. But don't think I ever got out of the 
Camel after being airborne even in the coldest weather without buckets of 
perspiration and considerable gratitude that I had gotten the little girl home 
again without breaking her into splinters!

http://www.theaerodrome.com/forum/aircraft/45869-sopwith-camel-myth-6.html

---

Additional comments on Camel handling characteristics by Victor Yeates, author 
of "Winged Victory" (yes, it's a fictional novel, but his experiences of 
flying a camel were realistic, and are a valid, honest description)...

Re training:

"Camels were wonderful fliers when you had got used to them, which took about 
three months of hard flying. At the end of that time you were either dead, a 
nervous wreck, or the hell of a pilot and a terror to Huns . . ."

Re turns:

"And in the more legitimate matter of vertical turns, nothing in the skies 
could follow in so tight a circle..."

Re the half-roll (Split S):

"The same with the half-roll. Nothing would half-roll like a Camel. A twitch 
of the stick and flick of the rudder and you were on your back. The nose 
dropped at once and you pulled out having made a complete reversal of 
direction in the least possible time.

Thomson, the squadron stunt expert told him that it (half-roll) was just the 
first half of a roll followed by the second half of a loop; the only stunt 
useful in fighting. If you were going the wrong way, it was the quickest known 
method of returning in your slipstream."

Re the loop (he didn't like looping a Camel):

"But a Camel had to be flown carefully round with exactly the right amount of 
left rudder, or else it would rear and buck and hang upside down and flop and 
spin."

Re general flight:

" . . . a Camel had to be held in flying position all the time, and was out of 
it in a flash. It was nose light, having a rotary engine weighing next to 
nothing per horse power, and was rigged tail heavy so that you had to be 
holding her down all the time. Take your hand off the stick and it would rear 
right up with a terrific jerk and stand on its tail."

Re ground strafing (which he hated due to ground anti-ac machine gun fire):

"Unfortunately, they were good machines for ground-strafing. They could dive 
straight down on anything, and when a few feet off the ground, go straight up 
again."

Re speed:"...a Camel was a wonderful machine in a scrap. If only it had been 
fifty per cent faster! There was the rub. A Camel could neither catch anything 
except by surprise, nor hurry away from an awkward situation, and seldom had 
the option of accepting or declining combat...You couldn't have everything."

http://www.theaerodrome.com/forum/aircraft/45869-sopwith-camel-myth-6.html

---

Indeed you are correct about the Rudder - it's area was a paltry 4.9 sq. ft. 
(and fin at 3 sq. ft.) 
http://www.theaerodrome.com/forum/aircraft/47951-sopwith-camel-myth-2-a.html

---

JSBSim seems to have the direction of force for the moment of inertia of the 
gyroscopic effect of the engine reversed. This creates a difficult problem for 
modelling the Camel, because the gyroscopic effect of the Camel is so 
pronounced. Below are my notes on the problem and now it was resolved in the 
Camel JSBSim flight modle:

  The docs say that sense =1 for CW propeller as seen
  from the cockpit.  The camel has a CW propeller by every example
  I've been able to find. This source definitely says, "The 
  direction of rotation was counter-clockwise as seen from the 
  propeller-end of the engine." The photos also show a CCW (from 
  propeller-end) rotating prop.  That would be clockwise as seen 
  from the pilot's seat and sense=1. 
  http://www.gracesguide.co.uk/Clerget
   
  But sense=1 makes the Camel climb on RH 
  turn and dive on LH turn.  Lots of sources say the opposite,
  especially including this experienced pilot who is clearly 
  flying a craft with a CW propeller (as seen from cockpit) and 
  yet he says the Camel dives on RH turn and climbs on LH.
  
    http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=j6PnKUEFX8g
  
  Wikipedia says, "To easily ascertain the direction of gyro effect, simply 
  remember that a rolling wheel tends, when it leans to the side, to turn in the 
  direction of the lean." http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gyroscope#Properties That 
  means, for a CW (from the rear) propeller, a turn to the right causes nose to 
  drop, exactly what is reported for the Camel. 

  My conclusion is that JSBSim has it backwards and sense=1 corresponds to CCW 
  rotation of the prop, as seen from the rear, as far as gyroscopic moment is 
  concerned.
  
  However, as far as p_factor & torque is concerned, JSBSim seems to have it 
  right.
  
  So what we're going to do is put in sense=1 here to get correct p_factor and 
  torque effects, but then put in a correction down in the aero section to 
  correct the moments, which JSBSim seems to have reversed.
                
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The enclosed Sopwith Camel JSBSim flight model started as an 
Aeromatic-generated model and was then heavily modified based on ideas from 
the FlightGear and JSBSim forums, wiki, documentation, and other JSBSim models.

In particular, the P-51D JSBSim FDM by Aeromatic, Jon Berndt, DATCOM, and 
modified extensively by Hal V. Engel provided a model of a JSBSim FDM that 
successful modeled asymmetric stall, snap rolls, induction of a spin during 
stall, and other characteristics found in the Camel FDM.

Other than the JSBSim FDM, adaption of weapons models for the Camel, and other 
minor adaption as needed for these updated systems, the Camel models, sounds, 
systems, and XML files are all the versions distributed with FlightGear, which 
credits AJ MacLeod, Vivian Meazza.

LICENSE, COPYING
FlightGear is released under the GNU GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE and this JSBSim 
FDM and all associated files are released under the same license.